Boston 

Medical  Library 

8  The  Fenwa  y 


A   TEXT-BOOK 


OF    THE 


MEDICAL  TREATMENT 


OF 


DISEASES  AND  SYMPTOMS 


£/      BY 

:N^EST0R  TIRARD,  M.D.  Lond.,  f.r.c.p. 

PROFESSOE  OF  THE  PBINCIPLES  AND  PRACTICE  OF  MEDICINE,  KING'S  COLLEGE,  LONDON  ;  PHYSICIAN 

TO  king's  COLLEGE  HOSPITAL  ;  EXAMINEE  IN    MATERIA  MEDICA  TO  THE 

CONJOINT  BOARD  OF  ENGLAND 

ADAPTED    TO 

THE  UNITED  STATES  PHARMACOPCEIA 


BY 

E.  QUIN  THORNTON,  M.D. 

DEMONSTRATOR  OF  THERAPEUTICS,   PHARMACY  AND  MATERIA  MEDICA,  JEFFERSON 
MEDICAL  COLLEGE,   PHILADELPHIA 


LEA  BROTHERS  &  CO. 

PHILADELPHIA    AND    NEW    YORK 
1900 


DR.  L  G.  TAYLOR, 

Kansas  City,  Mo. 

FEB    9  1901 


MAR  3  - 1930 

Entere^^cc^dillfjtp  theAjLctQ^rCongress,  in  the  year  1900,  by 

LEA  BEOTHEES  &  CO., 

In  the  Office  of  the  Librarian  of  Congress,  at  Washington.     All  rights  reserved. 


ja./t.^3^ 


dorjStan,  printer. 


PREFACE. 


Ix  this  book  an  attempt  has  been  made  to  snpply  a  want  created 
by  the  present  system  of  medical  edncation.  Students  learn  Prac- 
tical Pharmacy  at  an  early  stage  in  their  career ;  they  also  attend 
lectures  on  Pharmacology,  which  frequently  include  only  the  phys- 
iological actions  of  drugs.  When  they  have  to  apply  their  knowl- 
edge of  Therapeutics  at  the  bedside  they  feel  the  need  of  further 
guidance,  since  in  most  of  their  text-books  on  Medicine  the  subject 
of  Treatment  is  dealt  with  not  only  briefly,  but  in  general  terms, 
thus  affording  little  help  in  practical  work.  The  links  between 
Physiology  and  Pathology,  between  Pharmacology  and  Therapeu- 
tics, are  not  always  readily  apparent,  while  some  difficulty  is  often 
experienced  in  regarding  Treatment  from  a  new  point  of  view.  A 
student  may  know  many  diseases  and  symptoms  for  which  any 
particular  drug,  such  as  digitalis  or  belladonna,  may  be  employed, 
and  yet  scarcely  be  prepared  with  the  various  drugs  serviceable  in 
the  course  of  the  treatment  of  any  individual  disease  or  symptom. 

The  sequence  of  the  chapters  in  this  work  rests  chiefly  on  an 
anatomical  and  physiological  basis,  but  occasionally  sections  have 
been  inserted  dealing  with  symptoms  of  frequent  occurrence. 
Under  the  heading  of  the  different  diseases  those  symptoms  only 
are  mentioned  which  afford  indications  for  treatment.  Similarly, 
with  regard  to  the  causes  and  complications  of  certain  morbid 
conditions,  stress  is  laid  upon  those  which  call  for  prophylactic  or 
remedial  measures.  To  present  a  complete  account  of  the  various 
diseases,  including  questions  relating  to  pathology,  diagnosis,  and 
prognosis,  would  have  been  beyond  the  scope  and  purpose  of  this 
book. 

I  have  endeavored  to  indicate  the  forms  of  treatment  which 
have  already  received  general  approval,  and  although,  incident- 
ally, newer  remedies  are  frequently  mentioned,  I  have  included 
those  only  which  appear  likely  to  have  a  permanent  place  in  prac- 
tice. I  hope  that  to  senior  students  this  volume  may  form  a  useful 
supplement  to  their  text-books  on  Medicine,  and  that,  as  a  work 
of  reference,  practitioners  may  find  in  it  much  that  is  helpful  and 
suggestive. 

NESTOR   TIRARD. 

74  Harley  Street,  W. 


AMERICAN  PUBLISHERS'  NOTE. 


In  presenting  this  eminently  practical  work  to  the  American 
Profession  the  publishers  feel  that  they  are  rendering  a  service  to 
both  student  and  practitioner  by  making  available  a  most  useful 
guide  in  the  actual  treatment  of  the  patient  at  the  bedside. 

Among  the  many  specialties  which  to-day  constitute  the  Practice 
of  Medicine,  none  has  actually  grown  more  broadly  and  beneficently 
than  the  chief  of  all — namely,  Treatment ;  and  though  this  object 
of  all  medical  science  really  requires  a  volume  for  its  adequate 
presentation,  the  tendency  has  been  to  curtail  the  space  assigned 
to  it  in  the  text-books.  A  special  work  on  Treatment,  such  as  the 
present,  will  therefore  be  of  value  to  a  very  wide  circle.  It  will 
enable  the  student  to  bridge  the  gap  between  his  knowledge  of 
theory  and  its  application  at  the  bedside,  always  a  difficult  transi- 
tion, and  it  will  afPord  the  practitioner  suggestions  for  meeting  all 
symptoms,  stages  and  complications  of  medical  diseases,  space 
being  devoted  to  full  details.  The  numerous  prescriptions  have 
been  adapted  to  the  United  States  Pharmacojxeia  by  Dr.  E.  Quin 
Thornton. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTEE    I. 

CIKCTJLATION. 

PAGE 

Acute  Pericarditis — Chronic  Pericarditis — Endocarditis,  Simple  and  Ulcera- 
tive— Chronic  Valvular  Lesions — Dilatation  of  the  Heart — Hypertrophy 
of  the  Heart — Fatty  Degeneration — Functional  Palpitation — Angina 
Pectoris — Syncope  and  Collapse      ........       IT 

CHAPTER    II. 

CIRCULATION — continued. 

Aneurism  —  Anaemia  —  Chlorosis  —  Pernicious  Anaemia — Leucocy thsemia — 
Lymphadenoma — Diseases  of  the  Thyroid  Gland :  Goitre,  Exophthal- 
mic Goitre,  Myxoedema — Addison's  Disease  ......       40 

CHAPTER    III. 

RESPIRATION. 

Acute  Coryza  or  Nasal  Catarrh — Chronic  Nasal  Catarrh — Hay  Fever  or  Sum- 
mer Catarrh — Epistaxis — Acute  Laryngitis — Chronic  Laryngitis — Tuber- 
cular Laryngitis — Syphilitic  Laryngitis — Hoarseness  and  Aphonia — 
Laryngismus  Stridulus — False  Croup — Diphtheritic  Croup     .         .         .59 

CHAPTER   IV. 

RESPIRATION — Continued. 

Acute  Bronchitis  —  Chronic  Bronchitis  —  Bronchorrhcea  —  Bronchiectasis — 

Asthma — Emphysema — Haemoptysis       .         .         .         .         .         .         .       83 

CHAPTER    V. 

RESPIRATION — Continued. 

Pneumonia — Abscess  of  the  Lung  —  Gangrene  of  the  Lung  —  Pleurisy  — 

Hydrothorax — Empyema — Pneumothorax — Reflex  Cough     .         .         .     113 


vi  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER    VI. 

DIGESTION. 

PAGE 

Aphthous  Stomatitis — Stomatitis — Gangrenous  Stomatitis — Acute  CEsopha- 
gitis — Spasm  of  the  CEsophagus — Organic  Stricture  of  the  CEsophagus — 
Nutrient  Enemata — Vomiting,  Gastric,  Central,  and  Eeflex — Vomiting 
of  Pregnancy — Seasickness     .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .137 

CHAPTER    VII. 

DIGESTION — continued. 

Dyspepsia,  Acute  and  Chronic — Acute  Gastritis — Chronic  Gastritis — Lavage 

— Fermentation — Pain — Alkalies — Acids — Pepsin.         ....     160 

CHAPTER    VIII. 

DIGESTION — continued. 

Gastric  Ulcer — Hpematemesis — Perforation — Cancer  of  the  Stomach — Lavage 

— Antiseptics — Sedatives — Gastric  Neuroses :  Gastralgia  or  Gastrodynia     183 

CHAPTER    IX. 

DIGESTION — continued. 

Intestinal  Colic  or  Enteralgia — Lead  Colic — Constipation :   Exercise,  Diet, 

Laxatives — Tympanites  ..........     204 

CHAPTER    X. 

DIGESTION — continued. 

Diarrhoea :  In  Infancy— In  Childhood — In  Adult  Life — Dysentery — Intesti- 
nal Obstruction,  Acute  and  Chronic        .......     228 

CHAPTER    XI. 

DIGESTION — continued. 

Appendicitis — Typhlitis  and  Perityphlitis — Acute  Peritonitis — Chronic  Peri- 
tonitis— Tuberculous  Peritonitis — Animal  Parasites  affecting  the  Intes- 
tine—  Thread-worms  —  Round-worms  —  Tape- worms  —  Hydatids  of  the 
Liver — Trichinosis  ..........     255 

CHAPTER    XII. 

HEPATIC    DISEASES. 

Gallstones  —Hepatic  Colic — Acute  Obstructive  Jaundice — Chronic  Obstruc- 
tive Jaundice— Icterus  Neonatorum — Congestion  of  the  Liver        .         .     280 


CONTENTS.  vii 

CHAPTER    XIII. 

HEPATIC    DISEASES— COJJimuec/. 


PAGE 

Cirrhosis — Hsematemesis— Melsena — Ascites — Cancer  of  the  Liver — Sypli- 
ilitic  Disease  of  the  Liver — Lardaceous  Disease  of  the  Liver — Acute 
Yellow  Atrophy  of  the  Liver — Abscess  of  the  Liver  :  Tropical,  Pysemic 
— Suppurative  Pylephlebitis — Fatty  Liver        ......  302 

CHAPTER    XIV. 

RENAL    DISEASES. 

Lithuria — Uric  Acid  Gravel  —  Phosphaturia  —  Oxaluria  —  Hfematuria  — 
Hsemoglobinuria — Chyluria — Albuminuria — Renal  Calculus — Pyelitis — 
Hydronephrosis      ...........     322 

CHAPTER    XV. 

RENAL  DISEASES — Continued. 

Acute   Nephritis — Scarlatinal   Nephritis — Chronic  Nephritis — Cirrhosis  of 

the  Kidney     ............     349 

chapt^:r  XVI. 

NERVOUS    DISEASES 

Hysteria  —  Neurasthenia — Hystero-epilepsy — Enuresis  —  Chorea  —  Epilepsy 

— Locomotor  Ataxia — Infantile  Paralysis — Neuralgia     ....     372 

CHAPTER   XVII. 

NERVOUS  DISEASES — continued. 

Headache — Insomnia — Alcoholism — Acute  Alcoholism — Chronic  Alcohol- 
ism— Alcoholic  Neuritis — Delirium  Tremens — Apoplexy — Meningitis — 
Tubercular  Meningitis    ..........     39S 

CHAPTER   XVIII. 

SPECIFIC    INFECTIOUS    DISEASES. 

General  Management  of  Specific  Infectious  Diseases — Smallpox  (  Variola) — 
Chicken  pox  (  Varicella) — Scarlet  Fever  {Scarlatina) — Measles  (Morbilh) 
— German  Measles  {Rotheln  or  Rubeola) — Mumps  {Epidemic  Parotitis) 
— Whooping-cough  {Pertussin)        ........     419 

CHAPTER    XIX. 

SPECIFIC  INFECTIOUS  DISEASES — Continued. 

Typhoid  Fever  {Enteric  Fever,  Typhus  Abdominalis) — Treatment  of  Associated 
Symptoms  :  Hyperpyrexia,  Diarrhoea,  Nervous  Symptoms,  Hemorrhage, 
Perfo.ration,  Convalescence — Typhus  Fever  {Typhus  Exanthematicus) — 
Relapsing  Fever  {Febris  vs.  Typhus  Recurrens] — Epidemic  Influenza  {La. 
Grippe) 444 


viii  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER   XX. 

.SPECIFIC  INFECTIOUS  DISEASES — continued. 

PAGE 

Diphtheria  —  Erysipelas  —  Hydrophobia    [Rabies)  —  Lockjaw    ( Tetanus)  — 

Malarial  Fevers  [Intermittent,  Remittent,  Pernicious) — Cholera  Asiatica    .     463 

CHAPTER    XXI. 

TUBERCULOSIS. 

Curability — Climate  and  Health  Resorts — Open-air  Treatment — Exercise — 
Clothing — Diet — Nordrach  Treatment — General  Medicinal  Treatment — 
Antiseptic  Inhalations    ..........     487 

CHAPTER    XXII. 

TUBERCULOSIS — Continued. 

Treatment  of  Special  Symptoms  of  Phthisis — Cough- -Reflex  or  Mechanical 

Vomiting — Night-sweats — Pyrexia — Diarrhoea — Gastric  Symptoms        .     510 

CHAPTER    XXIII. 

CONSTITUTIONAL    DISEASES.' 

Rheumatic  Fever — Chronic'  Rheumatism — Chronic  Muscular  Rheumatism, 

Lumbago,  Torticollis,  Pleurodynia         .......     526 

CHAPTER    XXIV. 

CONSTITUTIONAL  DISEASES — Continued. 

Gout — Theoretical  Considerations — Acute  Gout — Subacute  and  Chronic  Gout 
— Metastatic  Gout — Irregular  Symptoms  referable  to  Gout — Osteo- 
arthritis ............     546 

CHAPTER    XXV. 

CONSTITUTIONAL  DISEASES — Continued. 

Rickets  —  Scurvy  —  Purpura  —  Hsemojjhilia — Diabetes  Insipidus  —  Diabetes 

Mellitus 566 

Index 591 


DR.  L.  G.  TAYL 
Kansas  City,  Mo 


MEDICAL  TREATMENT. 


CHAPTER   I. 

CIRCULATION. 

Acute  Pericarditis — Chronic  Pericarditis — Endocarditis,  Simple  and  Ulcerative — 
Chronic  Valvular  Lesions — Dilatation  of  the  Heart — Hypertrophy  of  the 
Heart — Fatty  Degeneration — Functional  Palpitation — Angina  Pectoris — Syn- 
cope and  Collapse. 

Acute  Pericarditis.  In  a  book  upon  Medical  Treatment  there 
are  obvious  advantages  in  grouping  the  different  diseases  and  promi- 
nent symptoms  on  an  anatomical  basis,  rather  than  in  dealing  with 
them  in  the  order  of  their  frequency  or  importance.  At  the  outset^ 
however,  this  scheme  presents  certain  inconveniences,  since  while  it 
appears  rational  to  commence  with  the  circulation,  and  to  discuss  in 
turn  acute  and  chronic  diseases  of  the  pericardium  before  approach- 
ing the  results  of  valvular  lesions,  trophic  changes,  neuroses,  and 
alterations  in  the  blood,  pericarditis  is  ordinarily  a  complication  of 
some  pre-existing  disease  for  which  definite  hygienic  and  medicinal 
measures  have  already  been  adopted.  The  development  of  this  new 
trouble,  while  it  calls  for  adequate  recognition,  will  not  necessarily 
interfere  with  the  general  course  of  treatment.  Acute  pericarditis, 
as  it  occurs  in  connection  with  rheumatic  fever,  is  so  commonly 
marked  by  pain  that  this  symptom  must  be  dealt  with  indej)endently 
of  the  measures  that  have  already  been  taken  for  the  relief  of  the 
other  symptoms  of  rheumatism.  The  pain  of  pericarditis  commonly 
originates  in  the  prsecordial  region,  but  it  may  extend  over  a  wide 
area,  and  may  be  associated  with  epigastric  tenderness  and  occa- 
sionally with  shooting  pains  similar  to  those  of  angina  pectoris. 
Dyspnoea  is  intimately  connected  Avith  the  pain,  and  although  this 
symptom  is  in  some  cases  referable  to  the  short  respirations  due  to 
the  instinctive  effort  to  diminish  movement,  it  nevertheless  is  fre- 
quently the  result  of  accumulations  of  fluid  within  the  pericardial 

2 


18  CIRCULATION. 

cavity,  and  is  then  associated  with  great  rapidity  of  the  pulse  and 
with  palpitation. 

With  acute  pericarditis  with  effusion,  the  patient  is  necessarily 
confined  to  bed  on  account  of  the  earlier  symptoms.  Still,  it  be- 
comes the  more  important  to  insist  upon  absolute  repose,  and,  indeed, 
all  movements  should  be  limited  as  much  as  possible. 

Pain  may  often  be  relieved  by  the  application  of  three  or  four 
leeches  over  the  prsecordia,  followed  by  the  use  of  a  poultice  or 
fomentation  sprinkled  with  laudanum.  As  in  the  treatment  of 
pneumonia,  relief  is  sometimes  afforded  by  placing  an  ice-bag  over 
the  prsecordial  region ;  but  it  is  advisable,  when  using  cold  applica- 
tions, to  watch  the  condition  of  the  pulse  and  the  aspect  of  the 
patient,  since  symptoms  of  collapse  occasionally  supervene  with 
great  rapidity  and  call  for  the  immediate  use  of  stimulants.  If  the 
fluid  in  the  pericardium  increases  rapidly  in  amount,  further  relief 
may  be  obtained  by  the  continuous  employment  of  poultices,  or  by 
blistering  the  surface  and  subsequently  using  poultices.  Apart 
from  these  local  measures,  it  is  generally  desirable  to  employ  salicyl- 
ates freely  when  the  condition  is  associated  with  acute  rheumatism. 
Relief  of  pain  may  also  be  obtained  by  the  internal  use  of  prepara- 
tions of  opium,  which,  as  in  peritonitis,  may  often  be  combined  with 
small  doses  of  quinine.  On  account  of  the  irregularity  and  weak- 
ness of  the  pulse  it  is  generally  necessary  to  employ  stimulants 
somewhat  liberally,  and  this  is  particularly  the  case  when  sodium 
salicylate  is  being  administered  in  large  doses.  In  some  forms  of 
pericarditis,  notably  in  the  dry  form  which  so  often  occurs  with 
kidney  diseases,  it  is  necessary  to  avoid  the  use  of  opium  and  also 
of  preparations  of  cantharides,  since  when  the  kidneys  are  affected 
both  of  these  remedies  may  produce  undesirable  symptoms.  In  such 
cases  restlessness  may  be  quieted  by  the  use  of  hyoscine  or  hyos- 
cyamine,  or  sometimes  of  chloral  hydrate,  although  it  is  necessary  to 
employ  the  latter  with  caution,  on  account  of  its  depressing  influence 
upon  the  heart.  Strong  preparations  of  iodine  may  be  used  as  blis- 
tering agents,  but  they  require  repeated  applications. 

As  pericarditis  occurs  so  often  in  connection  with  a  pre-existing 
disease,  it  is  unnecessary  to  make  any  material  modification  of  diet 
on  account  of  this  fresh  trouble.  When  the  breathing  becomes 
seriously  embarrassed  and  the  physical  signs  indicate  great  increase 
in  the  amount  of  effusion,  the  desirability  of  giving  relief  by  the 
removal  of  fluid  must  be  considered,  and  the  small  operation  this 


ENDOCARDITIS.  19 

necessitates  does  not  appear  to  add  materially  to  the  danger  of  the 
case.  The  aspirator  is  usually  introduced  obliquely  in  the  fourth  or 
fifth  intercostal  space,  about  an  inch  external  to  the  left  margin  of 
the  sternum.  If  the  fluid  first  drawn  is  found  to  be  clear  and  color- 
less, or  straw-colored,  moderate  relief  will  probably  be  afforded  by 
the  slow  withdrawal  of  a  few  ounces.  It  is  generally  considered  to 
be  undesirable  to  attempt  to  empty  the  pericardial  sac.  Should  the 
fluid  be  found  to  be  purulent,  it  should  be  removed  through  a  small 
incision,  and  a  drainage  tube  should  be  inserted.  This  treatment 
may  appear  somewhat  formidable,  yet  it  affords  the  best  chances  of 
recovery,  and  sufficient  successful  cases  have  now  been  recorded  to 
warrant  its  employment.  In  fifteen  recorded  cases  of  treatment  of 
purulent  pericarditis  by  incision,  eight  recovered  and  seven  were 
fatal. 

Chronic  Pericarditis.  Chronic  pericarditis  may  occur  in  two 
forms  :  the  one  with  but  little  effusion  of  fluid  constitutes  the  form 
which  is  fairly  frequent  in  the  course  of  kidney  diseases,  while  in 
the  other  a  large  amount  of  fluid  may  accumulate  as  part  of  a  gen- 
eral dropsical  effusion.  The  dry  form  may  require  local  applications 
for  the  relief  of  pain,  but  it  may  be  frequently  found  on  physical 
examination  when  there  has  been  no  complaint  of  pain.  The  drop- 
sical effusion  may  sometimes  be  relieved  by  the  ordinary  measures 
adopted  for  the  treatment  of  general  dropsy.  Great  alterations  in 
the  area  of  dulness  may  follow  the  employment  of  diuretics,  such 
as  preparations  of  potassium  nitrate,  squill,  digitalis,  or  scoparium ; 
while  other  cases  appear  to  benefit  from  the  employment  of  saline 
and  hydragogue  purgatives — a  form  of  treatment  which  will  be  more 
fully  discussed  in  connection  with  chronic  renal  dropsy.  As  in  acute 
pericarditis,  it  may  be  necessary  to  afford  immediate  relief  of  urgent 
symptoms  by  aspiration. 

Endocarditis.  Endocarditis  occurs  under  two  forms :  simple  and 
ulcerative.  In  both  it  is  necessary  to  treat  first  the  cause  of  the 
disease,  and  secondly  the  special  symptoms  which  may  develop  during 
its  progress.  Simple  endocarditis  occurs  so  commonly  in  connection 
with  rheumatic  fever  that  the  treatment  is  largely  that  adapted  to 
this  disease.  It  may,  however,  also  develop  in  connection  with. 
scarlet  fever,  with  phthisis,  diabetes,  chorea,  and  occasionally  with 
the  late  stages  of  Bright's  disease ;  but  in  all  these  cases  the  onset 
is  much  more  gradual  than  when  it  is  due  to  acute  rheumatism, 
and  it  is,  therefore,  more  difficult  to  apply  appropriate  remedies  at 


20 


CIRCULATION. 


the  time  when  they  may  be  of  service.  When  dealing  with  a  case 
of  endocarditis  associated  with  rheumatic  fever,  the  diet  should  be 
strictly  regulated  so  as  to  contain  a  relatively  large  proportion  of 
fluid  of  a  non-irritating  character.  Thus  it  is  advisable  to  employ 
fairly  large  quantities  of  milk,  of  weak  beef -tea  or  broth,  as  well 
as  of  alkaline  drinks.  In  these  cases  it  is  also  desirable  to  give 
alkalies,  such  as  potassium  bicarbonate  and  salicylates  or  salicin, 
which  frequently  diminish  the  temperature  and  reduce  the  frequency 
of  the  pulse.  With  the  same  objects  quinine  may  be  employed  in 
repeated  small  doses. 

These  drugs  are  frequently  prescribed  in  the  following  forms,  the 
mixtures  being  taken  three  times  a  day  or  oftener : 


JJ. — Potassii  bicarbonatis 
Potassii  nitratis 
Aquse 

K .  — Potassii  bicarbonatis 
Tincturae  hyoscyami 
Aquae  camphorse 
Aquae  destillatae 

R. — Potassii  bicarbonatis 
Tincturae  zingiberis 
Infusi  rhei 
Infusi  gentianse  composit: 

R. — Quininae  sulphatis     . 
Ammonii  carbonatis 
Potassii  bicarbonatis 
Tragacanthae     . 
Aquae  chloroformi     . 
Aquae  destillatae 


s.  ad 


gr.  X. 
gr.  V. 

gr.  XX. 


•     gr.  X. 
s.  ad     ^j. 


gr-  J. 
gr.  ij. 
gr.  XX. 
gr.  iv. 
3iv. 


ad 


Caton^  advocates  continuous  counter-irritation  combined  with  pro- 
longed rest.  When  in  a  case  of  acute  rheumatism  a  bruit  is  heard 
at  the  mitral  or  aortic  valve,  or  even  when  the  premonitory  assour- 
dissement  is  perceptible,  he  applies  a  series  of  small  blisters,  each 
the  size  of  a  silver  half-dollar,  along  the  course  of  the  third,  fourth, 
fifth,  or  sixth  intercostal  nerve,  in  front  and  at  the  sides.  Only  one 
blister  is  applied  at  a  time,  but  the  blistering  is  repeated  at  different 
points.  He  gives  at  the  same  time  sodium  or  potassium  iodide 
in  8  or  10-grain  doses  thrice  daily,  and  he  keeps  his  patients  in 
bed  for  about  six  weeks.     He  claims  for  this  treatment  a  very  con- 


British  Medical  Journal,  January  25,  1896. 


END  0  CARDITIS.  2 1 

siderable  reduction  of  the  liability  to  chronic  valvular  mischief  after 
acute  rheumatism  with  endocarditis. 

The  special  symptoms  likely  to  arise  in  connection  with  endocar- 
ditis are  those  of  anaemia,  palpitation,  and  pain.  The  first  may  be 
greatly  benefited  by  the  administration  of  tincture  of  ferric  chloride. 
Palpitation  may  be  controlled  by  the  employment  of  digitalis,  either 
the  infusion  or  the  tincture,  while  some  cases  appear  to  improve 
greatly  during  the  administration  of  stimulants.  In  endocarditis 
it  is  necessary  to  watch  the  pulse  closely  while  giving  stimulants, 
and  to  check  their  administration  if  the  pulse  gains  in  rapidity  and 
loses  in  force.  For  the  relief  of  pain  different  preparations  of 
opium  may  be  used,  and  of  these  the  compound  ipecacuanha  powder 
is  often  preferred.  When  given  at  night  this  powder  will  frequently 
promote  sleep  by  reducing  cardiac  discomfort.  In  some  cases  of 
more  chronic  type,  benefit  appears  to  result  from  the  employment  of 
iodide  of  potassium,  or  of  sodium.  During  convalescence  from  rheu- 
matic endocarditis,  it  is  necessary  to  warn  the  patient  to  avoid  muscu- 
lar exertion  and  cardiac  strain.  There  are  good  grounds  for  believing 
that  carelessness  at  this  period  is  liable  to  be  followed  by  increased 
cardiac  distress.  When  the  progress  of  the  case  is  estimated  by  the 
sounds  of  the  heart,  it  is  certain  that  murmurs  may  disappear  during 
convalescence  from  rheumatic  endocarditis,  and  may  reappear  at  a 
later  date  when  the  patient  has  returned  to  his  ordinary  occupation. 

Ulcerative  endocarditis  is  a  form  associated  with  the  development 
of  micro-organisms  in  the  blood.  It  usually  occurs  in  connection 
with  septic  processes,  and  it  is  frequently  characterized  by  wide 
oscillations  of  temperature,  which,  in  all  probability,  depend  upon 
the  passage  of  emboli  from  the  heart  to  various  parts  of  the  body. 
These  cases  were  formerly  frequently  treated  by  drugs  calculated  to 
check  the  activity  of  the  micro-organisms,  and  with  this  idea  fairly 
large  doses  of  quinine,  salol,  sodium  sulphocarbonate,  or  of  corro- 
sive mercuric  chloride  have  been  employed.  Although  the  use  of 
these  remedies  has  in  certain  cases  been  attended  by  good  results, 
the  disease  is  frequently  fatal.  Recently  many  observers  have 
attempted  to  deal  with  this  disease  by  the  injection  of  antistrepto- 
coccic serum,  which  in  some  cases  appears  to  have  given  satisfactory 
results.  The  usual  dose  administered  is  20  c.c,  and  the  injections 
are  repeated  daily.  In  a  case  under  my  own  care,  the  patient  im- 
proved during  the  administration  of  serum,  but .  died  shortly  after 
leaving  the  hospital  at  his  own  request. 


22  CIRCULATION. 

Chronic  Valvular  Lesions.  The  treatment  of  chronic  valvular 
lesions  may  be  considered  from  two  totally  different  points  of  view. 
The  first  is  the  treatment  of  those  cases  in  which  the  valvular  lesion, 
whether  obstructive  or  regurgitant,  has  been  sufficiently  compensated 
by  hypertrophy  and  dilatation  of  the  heart.  The  threatened  inter- 
ference with  the  course  of  the  circulation  may  then  produce  no 
symptoms,  or  the  patient  may  only  be  conscious  of  a  little  shortness 
of  breath  or  of  occasional  palpitation.  A  large  number  of  indi- 
viduals with  valvular  lesions  are  wholly  unaware  of  their  condition, 
and  it  is,  therefore,  obvious  that  treatment  is  scarcely  called  for  in 
such  cases ;  but  sometimes  it  may  seem  desirable  to  warn  patients 
of  the  weakness  of  the  heart's  action,  so  that  they  may  avoid  incur- 
ring risks  from  sudden  strain  or  violent  exertion.  Wherever  it  is 
possible,  it  is  distinctly  desirable  to  change  the  occupation  if  it 
appears  likely  to  be  prejudicial.  Many  such  patients  are  able  to 
undergo  severe  physical  labor  without  necessarily  suffering  in  any 
way ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  life  may  be  rendered  miserable  by 
learning  the  truth  about  their  condition.  Since  the  risks  in  such 
cases  are  increased  by  any  degenerative  changes  of  the  heart's 
muscle,  nourishing  diet  should  be  encouraged  and  stimulants  should 
be  avoided.  It  is  also  necessary  to  employ  in  moderation,  if  at  all, 
such  articles  as  have  a  distinct  influence  upon  the  rapidity  of  the 
heart's  action ;  hence  tea,  coffee,  and  tobacco  should  be  employed 
only  sparingly.  It  is  sometimes  desirable  to  warn  patients  of  pos- 
sible risks  connected  with  extremes  of  temperature,  and  a  climate 
of  moderate  warmth  and  dryness  may  occasionally  defer  the  onset 
of  more  serious  symptoms.  From  what  has  been  said  of  the  com- 
parative absence  of  symptoms  it  will  be  seen  that  medicinal  treat- 
ment is  scarcely  necessary.  Occasionally  benefit  results  from  the 
use  of  non-astringent  forms  of  iron  when  there  is  a  tendency  to 
anaemia ;  at  other  times,  notably  with  mitral  disease,  small  doses  of 
bromides  may  be  employed  to  check  slight  irritability  of  the  heart's 
action.  Under  similar  conditions  digitalis  and  strophanthus  may 
reduce  the  frequency  of  the  pulse,  but  in  many  cases  of  mitral  dis- 
ease some  increased  rapidity  of  the  pulse  is  a  natural  consequence 
of  the  lesion,  and  does  not  require  treatment. 

Secondly,  with  regard  to  uncompensated  cases,  or  rather  to  those 
cases  in  which  the  hypertrophy  and  dilatation  are  commencing  to 
fail,  it  will  be  necessary  to  speak  in  detail  of  the  various  complica- 
tions resulting  respectively  from  mitral  and  aortic  disease,  but  gen- 


CHRONIC  VALVULAR  LESIONS. 


23 


eral  treatment  may  be  adopted  which  is  equally  applicable  to  both 
conditions.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  necessary  to  treat  these  cases  by 
rest  in  a  recumbent  posture,  and  frequently  this  is  almost  sufficient, 
in  early  stages,  to  restore  comfort.  When  there  is  much  irregularity 
of  the  heart's  action  some  cardiac  tonic  must  be  used,  either  the 
tincture  or  infusion  of  digitalis,  or  the  tincture  of  strophanthus,  and 
it  is  generally  useful  to  give  simultaneously  some  form  of  iron,  select- 
ing in  preference  one  least  likely  to  produce  constipation.  Some- 
times, when  digitalis  and  strophanthus  have  long  been  employed, 
benefit  may  result  from  the  substitution  of  citrated  caffeine ;  but  it 
will  be  frequently  found  desirable  to  use  these  three  drugs  in  suc- 
cessive weeks. 

The  list  of  cardiac  tonics  is  rather  lengthy,  and  at  various  times 
one  or  other  has  come  into  an  ephemeral  use.  The  salts  of  barium 
at  one  time  found  favor,  but  are  not  much  employed  at  present. 
Of  other  drugs,  convallaria,  adonis  vernalis,  and  sparteine  have  been 
employed,  but  most  practitioners  find  it  unnecessary  to  resort  to 
these  remedies,  since  strophanthus  and  digitalis,  if  judiciously  em- 
ployed, usually  give  relief.  Sometimes,  especially  when  there  is 
much  sleeplessness  or  headache,  nitrites,  which  lower  the  blood- 
pressure,  are  preferable  to  the  cardiac  tonics,  which  raise  it.  With 
any  of  these  remedies  bitter  tonics  may  be  conjoined,  such  as  quinine, 
nux  vomica,  strychnine,  and  quassia,  or  these  tonics  may  be  given 
separately.  The  following  prescriptions  for  tonic  mixtures,  to  be 
taken  twice  or  thrice  daily,  are  often  used  : 


B .  — Quininse  sulphatis    . 

Acidi  hydrobromici  diluti 
Aquse        .... 

R  . — Quininse  sulphatis    . 

Acidi  nitro-hydrochlorici  diluti 

Aquse  cinnamomi 

Aquse        .... 

R. — Quininse  sulphatis    . 
Acidi  sulphurici  diluti 
Tincturse  aurantii  dulcis  . 
Syrupi      .... 
Aquse        .... 

R .  — Tincturse  nucis  vomicae 

Tincturse  gentianse  compositse 
Acidi  nitro-hydrochlorici  diluti 
Syrupi      .... 
Aquse       .... 


s.  ad 


ad 


s.  ad 


gr- J- 

3SS. 

gr-  J- 
gr.  ij. 

3SS. 

S3- 


24 


CIRCULATION. 


li. — Tincturse  nucis  vomicae     . 
Ammonii  carbonatis 
Spiritus  chloroformi 
Infusi  quassise. 

R. — Strychninse  hydrochloratis 

Acidi  nitro-hydrochlorici  diluti 
Infusi  gentianse  compositi 

K. — Acidi  nitro-hydrochlorici  diluti 
Spiritus  chloroformi 
Infusi  quassise 


s.  ad 


ad 


ad 


gr.  iv. 

gi--    sV' 


The  comfort  of  the  patient  may  also  be  increased  by  the  occasional 
administration  of  preparations  of  mercury  in  purgative  doses,  but 
these  must  be  used  with  considerable  discretion,  since  if  too  often 
employed  they  may  produce  undue  weakness. 

The  special  symptoms  which  arise  in  connection  with  chronic 
valvular  disease  are  somewhat  different  when  the  mitral  or  aortic 
valves  are  affected,  though  one  of  the  earliest  indications  calling  for 
special  treatment  generally  arises  from  an  interference  with  the  circu- 
lation through  the  lung.  This  may  induce  either  increasing  dyspnoea 
or  frequently  recurring  attacks  of  cough,  which  is  sometimes  associ- 
ated with  hsemoptysis.  The  dyspnoea  and  cough  may  occasionally 
be  benefited  by  the  administration  of  simple  expectorants,  such  as 
mixtures  containing  ammonium  carbonate  or  sal  volatile.  More 
often  greater  benefit  results  from  the  employment  of  cardiac  tonics 
at  the  same  time  that  these  stimulant  remedies  are  being  used.  In 
severe  cases,  more  particularly  in  hospital  practice,  it  may  be  neces- 
sary to  perform  venesection,  and  on  several  occasions  I  have  seen 
great  improvement  from  the  removal  of  eight  to  ten  ounces  of  blood. 
It  must  be  remembered,  however,  that  such  extreme  engorgement 
occurs  comparatively  rarely  in  private  practice,  as  advice  is  sought 
more  early.  The  hsemoptysis  is  seldom  sufficient  to  cause  anxiety 
or  to  call  for  treatment,  and  in  many  cases  the  distress  is  greatly 
relieved  by  its  occurrence,  even  though  the  anxiety  of  the  friends  is 
increased.  Sometimes  the  symptoms  of  lung  engorgement  may  be 
greatly  reduced  by  the  use  of  purgatives,  but,  as  previously  indicated, 
it  is  desirable  to  be  somewhat  sparing  in  the  use  of  these  drugs. 

Many  cases  of  mitral  disease  at  a  later  stage  show  indications  of 
interference  with  the  work  of  the  right  side  of  the  heart,  this  inter- 
ference making  itself  evident  primarily  by  some  degree  of  cyanosis, 
owing  to  the  impaired  movement  through  the  venous  circulation, 
and  at  a  later  stage  symptoms  indicative  of  interference  Avith  the 


CHRONIC  VALVULAR  LESIONS. 


25 


rate  of  blood-flow  through  the  inferior  vena  cava  may  be  developed  ; 
thus  many  patients  suffer  from  interference  with  the  work  of  the 
liver,  which  may  even  lead  to  the  production  of  transient  forms  of 
jaundice.  Simultaneously,  or  even  independently,  gastro-intestinal 
catarrh  may  develop,  and  albuminuria  with  reduction  in  the  daily 
excretion  of  urine,  and  dropsy  may  be  noted,  the  latter  commencing 
ordinarily  in  the  lower  extremities  and  gradually  progressing  up- 
ward. These  symptoms  respectively  call  for  special  treatment.  The 
cyanosis  is  usually  diminished  by  rest  and  by  the  employment  of 
cardiac  tonics,  which  to  some  extent  also  give  relief  from  the  symp- 
toms of  gastro-intestinal  catarrh  and  of  jaundice.  Congestive  albu- 
minuria scarcely  requires  special  treatment,  and  in  the  early  stages 
the  dropsy  of  heart  disease  will  be  largely  under  the  control  of  car- 
diac tonics  and  of  rest.  Later,  however,  it  may  be  necessary  to  use 
in  addition  diuretics  or  even  diaphoretics,  though  the  latter  are  not 
so  frequently  employed  as  in  dropsy  the  result  of  kidney  disease. 

The  following  diuretic  mixtures,  to  be  taken  three  or  four  times  a 
day,  are  frequently  prescribed  in  various  London  hospitals  : 


K.  — Potassii  nitratis 

Spiritus  setheris  nitrosi 

Syrupi  limonis 

Aquse  menthse  piperitse 

R. — Potassii  acetatis 
Potassii  nitratis 
Spiritus  setheris  nitrosi 
Spiritus  juniperi 
Decocti  scoparii 

R. — Potassii  acetatis 
Tinctures  scillse 
Spiritus  setheris  nitrosi 
Decocti  scoparii 


.     gr.  XV. 

.  mxi. 

s.  ad     ^j. 

gr.  XX. 
•      gr.  X. 

.     3ss. 
.     3ss. 

gr.  XX. 

mxx. 

3SS. 


ad 


The  following  mixture  possesses  both  diuretic  and  diaphoretic 

properties  : 

R. — Potassii  acetatis        .......  gr.  xx. 

Potassii  nitratis         .         .         .         .         .         .         .  gr.  v. 

Spiritus  setheris  nitrosi     .  .  .  .  .  .  ^ss. 

Aceti  scillae      ........  TTtx. 

Liquoris  ammonii  acetatis         .         .         .         .         ■  3ij- 

Aquse  camphorse       .......  ^  j. 

Aquse  destillatse        .         .         .         .         .      q.  s.  ad  ^j. 

Of  diuretic  remedies  by  far  the  most  important  is  digitalis,  and 
it  may  be  given  in  increasing  doses  so  long  as  the  patient  is  kept  at 


26  CIRCULATION. 

rest  and  under  observation.  Preparations  of  squill,  of  scoparium, 
or  of  potassium  nitrate  may  be  given  with  digitalis.  Occasionally, 
when  the  benefit  from  these  remedies  appears  to  have  ceased,  I  have 
found  diuretin  of  service,  though  sometimes  it  fails.  If  in  spite  of 
these  drugs  the  oedema  increases,  it  will  be  necessary  to  consider  the 
advisability  of  operative  measures.  Large  quantities  of  fluid  may 
be  removed  by  making  incisions  over  the  ankles.  Many  prefer  to 
effect  the  same  end  by  numerous  small  punctures  in  the  legs,  but 
the  discomfort  which  ensues  from  the  constant  moisture  is  a  great 
disadvantage.  As  in  the  treatment  of  renal  dropsy,  Southey's  tubes 
are  often  used  with  marked  benefit.  Owing  to  the  dangers  of  start- 
ing inflammatory  changes  it  is  always  desirable,  when  dealing  with 
cardiac  dropsy,  to  postpone  operations  as  far  as  possible.  In  severe 
cases,  when  the  accumulation  of  fluid  within  the  abdominal  cavity 
interferes  with  the  freedom  of  movement  of  the  diaphragm  and  so 
impedes  both  respiration  and  circulation,  it  will  often  be  necessary 
to  perform  paracentesis. 

The  symptoms  of  aortic  regurgitation  or  aortic  obstruction  present 
very  marked  differences  in  early  and  in  late  conditions.  In  the  latter 
the  symptoms  resemble  those  due  to  failure  of  the  mitral  valve,  and 
this,  in  all  probability,  is  due  to  the  fact  that  after  aortic  regurgita- 
tion has  existed  for  a  length  of  time,  some  degree  of  mitral  regur- 
gitation necessarily  follows  from  over-distention  of  the  mitral  orifices  ; 
hence,  though  the  disorder  may  primarily  be  due  to  failure  of  the 
aortic  valves,  the  symptoms  of  failure  of  the  mitral  valves  become 
superadded,  and  in  the  main  the  lines  of  treatment  are  those  adapted 
to  mitral  regurgitation.  Before  this  stage  has  been  reached,  how- 
ever, the  patient  will  have  experienced  considerable  discomfort  from 
the  failure  of  the  aortic  valves,  or  at  all  events  from  the  failure  of 
compensation  of  the  amount  of  obstruction  or  of  leakage  at  the  aortic 
valves.  Thus  patients  constantly  suffer  from  transient  attacks  of 
giddiness,  especially  after  undergoing  extra  exertion  or  on  assuming 
the  erect  posture  suddenly. 

The  degree  of  discomfort  in  aortic  cases  essentially  depends  upon 
the  nutrition  of  the  hypertrophied  left  ventricle.  Very  commonly, 
as  age  advances,  the  hypertrophied  muscle  undergoes  gradual  degen- 
eration and  becomes  unable  to  cope  with  the  increased  aortic  incom- 
petency. Measures  must,  therefore,  be  adopted  to  retard  the  degen- 
erative changes  so  far  as  possible,  and  to  maintain  the  nutrition  of 
the  ventricle ;  while,  if  we  have  good  grounds  for  believing  that 


CHBONIG  VALVULAR  LESIONS.  27 

degeneration  has  already  taken  place,  additional  warnings  must  be 
given  of  the  risks  incurred  with  any  sudden  overstrain.  When 
patients  complain  of  symptoms  referable  to  the  heart — that  is,  of 
sense  of  fulness  within  the  thorax,  or  of  pain  in  the  cardiac  region, 
or  of  increasing  dyspnoea — relief  may  frequently  be  afforded  by  the 
employment  of  stimulant  remedies :  graduated  doses  of  compound 
spirits  of  ether  and  of  aromatic  spirits  of  ammonia,  together  with 
avoidance  of  overstrain,  and  in  some  cases  with  actual  rest  in  bed, 
will  often  afford  temporary  relief.  In  such  cases,  also,  digitalis  may 
be  beneficial,  though  it  is  often  urged,  on  the  other  hand,  that  by 
causing  prolongation  of  diastole  this  drug  gives  more  time  for  the 
blood  to  regurgitate  into  the  dilating  ventricle.  Still,  it  must  be 
regarded  as  a  clinical  fact  that  in  a  large  proportion  of  cases  of 
aortic  disease  benefit  results  from  the  use  of  digitalis.  The  cardiac 
contractions  become  more  regular  and  more  efficient,  and  the  sense 
of  discomfort  is  diminished.  It  has  also  been  urged  against  the 
employment  of  digitalis  in  aortic  regurgitation,  that  by  causing  con- 
traction of  the  arterioles  it  increases  the  blood-pressure  and  so  fur- 
ther embarrasses  the  action  of  the  heart.  It  must  be  admitted  that 
in  certain  cases  little  relief  is  afforded  by  the  use  of  this  drug  ;  while 
greater  help  can  be  obtained  from  remedies  which  diminish  the 
blood-pressure — that  is,  by  vasodilators.  Speaking  generally,  the 
degree  of  benefit  likely  to  result  from  the  use  of  digitalis  is  to  be 
measured  by  the  extent  of  failure  of  compensation-;  in  other  words, 
there  is  but  little  scope  for  the  use  of  this  drug  in  the  earlier  stages 
of  aortic  disease,  while  it  is  of  extreme  service  in  the  later  stages. 
If  during  its  employment  the  pulse  becomes  rapid  and  irregular, 
it  is  necessary  to  discontinue  its  administration,  and  under  such 
circumstances  strophanthus  may  give  better  results. 

With  regard  to  the  use  of  vasodilators  in  aortic  disease,  they 
are  chiefly  indicated  with  spasmodic  attacks  of  pain  referable  to 
the  heart.  These  remedies,  must,  however,  be  employed  in  two 
different  ways  :  first,  for  the  immediate  relief  of  serious  spasmodic 
pain ;  and,  second,  for  the  continuous  failure  of  the  blood-pressure. 
For  the  first,  nitrite  of  amyl  is  usually  administered,  the  vapor  being 
inhaled  after  crushing  in  a  handkerchief  a  small  glass  capsule  con- 
taining from  3  to  5  minims ;  but  the  effect  of  this  remedy  is  apt  to 
pass  off  quickly,  and  although  it  possesses  great  advantages  in  emer- 
gencies, one  of  the  drugs  of  slower  action  is  more  commonly  preferred. 
Many  patients  like  using  nitroglycerin  in  some  form.     The  tabellse. 


28  CIRCULATION. 

Avhich  contains  the  hundredth  part  of  a  grain,  will  often  reduce  pain, 
but  they  are  very  apt  to  cause  headache,  and  smaller  doses  should 
then  be  taken.  Many  patients  endeavor  to  break  the  tabellse  in  half, 
and  this  doubtless  accounts  for  the  increased  size  recently  recom- 
mended in  the  British  Pharmacopceia.  Others  prefer  the  employ- 
ment of  the  liquor  trinitrini,  and  carry  about  with  them  small  bottles 
of  this  solution  well  diluted. 

The  headache  resulting  from  the  use  of  nitroglycerin  constitutes 
a  great  objection  to  its  employment,  although  its  action  is  more 
prolonged  than  that  of  nitrite  of  amyl.  Numerous  researches  for 
a  vasodilator  of  more  prolonged  action  have  been  made,  and  for 
this  purpose  Dr.  Bradbury  has  recommended  erythrol  tetranitrate. 
According  to  recent  observations,  this  drug  produces  little  effect 
until  half  an  hour  after  its  administration,  and  the  maximum  effect 
is  produced  at  the  end  of  an  hour.  After  this  the  arterial  tension 
gradually  increases  again,  but  it  does  not  return  to  its  previous  con- 
dition until  about  ten  hours  after  the  dose  has  been  taken.  Erythrol 
tetranitrate  may  perhaps,  it  is  claimed,  prevent  the  onset  of  attacks 
of  pain ;  although,  from  the  greater  rapidity  of  action,  nitrite  of 
amyl  and  nitroglycerin  are  more  serviceable  in  cutting  short  the 
severity  of  sudden  attacks  of  cardiac  pain.  It  has  been  stated  that 
when  nitrites  are  administered  continuously  for  long  periods  they 
tend  to  act  as  cardiac  depressants ;  but  very  numerous  cases  have 
been  recorded  where  these  drugs  have  been  employed  for  a  great 
length  of  time  with  marked  relief  of  urgent  symptoms  and  with 
no  indication  of  prejudicial  effects. 

Dilatation  of  the  Heart.  Dilatation  of  the  heart,  although  it 
is  most  commonly  seen  as  an  accompaniment  of  valvular  lesions, 
is  frequently  to  be  met  with  where  there  is  no  evidence  of  failure 
of  the  valves,  and,  further,  where  there  is  no  history  to  point  to  the 
probability  of  endocarditis.  It  may  occur  in  its  simplest  form  dur- 
ing convalescence  from  prolonged  febrile  attacks,  and  it  is  also,  to 
some  extent,  dependent  upon  other  conditions  which  weaken  the 
walls  of  the  heart  or  cause  sudden  strain  to  be  thrown  upon  the 
heart,  which  is  physically  unprepared.  Various  excesses  have  been 
credited  with  the  causation  of  this  condition,  as,  for  example,  exces- 
sive smoking  or  drinking ;  it  is  also  a  form  generally  associated  with 
excessive  mountaineering  at  the  commencement  of  a  holiday.  The 
symptoms  are  mainly  those  referable  to  irregular  action,  and  they 
frequently  first  attract  attention  by  palpitation,  which  comes  on  sud- 


HYPERTROPHY  OF  THE  HEART.  29 

denly  during  the  night.  As  the  causes  are  extremely  various,  the 
first  element  in  the  treatment  lies  in  ascertaining  the  cause.  For 
those  who  have  been  over-exercising  it  may  be  sufficient  to  advocate 
more  rational  measures,  but  in  mountainous  districts  it  is  often  de- 
sirable to  send  to  a  lower  level  patients  who  are  troubled  in  this 
way.  Many  people  suffer  from  dilatation  and  palpitation  at  altitudes 
of  4000  to  6000  feet  who  can  breathe  with  perfect  comfort  in  the 
valleys.  In  more  extreme  cases  it  may  be  necessary  to  insist  upon 
complete  rest,  but  generally  the  avoidance  of  strain,  together  with 
moderate  daily  open-air  exercise,  offer  better  chances  of  recovery. 
Sometimes  in  intractable  cases  greater  benefit  results  from  a  long  sea 
voyage,  where  the  limitation  of  muscular  exercise  and  the  simple 
conditions  of  life  allow  the  ventricle  to  regain  its  normal  dimen- 
sions. The  employment  of  cardiac  tonics  is  frequently  beneficial, 
and  progress  is  often  more  rapid  if  these  are  combined  with  hsema- 
tinics. 

Since  these  patients  are  generally  highly  neurotic,  it  is  often  de- 
sirable to  employ  sedatives  in  moderate  doses,  and  particularly  to 
check  the  habit  of  sleeplessness  which  is  often  found  in  connection 
with  this  condition.  Some  patients  prefer  to  go  through  a  mild 
course  of  treatment  at  a  hydropathic  establishment,  and  there  is 
little  doubt  that  the  enforced  simplicity  of  life  is,  as  a  rule,  bene- 
ficial. It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  say  that  if  the  condition  appears 
to  depend  upon  the  excessive  use  of  tobacco  or  of  tea  or  coffee,  or 
if  it  is  associated  with  dyspeptic  symptoms,  special  treatment  is 
required. 

Hypertrophy  of  the  Heart.  Hypertrophy  of  the  heart,  like  the 
last  condition,  is  frequently  the  result  of  valvular  lesions,  and,  as  a 
rule,  the  amount  of  hypertrophy  and  of  dilatation  are  indications 
of  the  degree  of  interference  with  the  circulation.  Hypertrophy, 
however,  may  occasionally  be  found  when  there  is  no  evidence  of 
valvular  trouble  and  but  little  of  dilatation  of  the  cavities.  This 
condition  may  arise  in  consequence  of  any  conditions  provoking 
over-action  of  the  heart.  Some  degree  of  hypertrophy  probably 
always  accompanies  the  muscular  strain  involved  in  training  for 
boat  races  or  other  forms  of  athleticism,  and  in  these  days  there  is 
little  doubt  that  this  condition  is  more  frequent  owing  to  the  amount 
of  strain  due  to  injudicious  exertion  in  bicycling  uphill  or  in  the 
face  of  a  strong  wind.  The  symptoms  referable  to  the  condition  are 
somewhat  vague.     The  most  common  is  palpitation,  but  complaint 


30  CIRCULATION. 

may  also  be  made  of  giddiness  and  headache,  and  sometimes  of  other 
indications  of  interference  with  the  circulation  through  the  central 
nervous  system.  It  is  comparatively  rare  for  this  condition  to 
require  treatment,  since  generally  after  the  cessation  of  the  causes 
the  hypertrophy  appears  to  right  itself  quickly.  Sometimes  in 
attacks  of  palpitation  it  may  be  advisable  to  limit  the  amount  of 
exercise  and  to  reduce  the  quantity  of  animal  food.  All  forms  of 
alcohol  should  be  prohibited,  and  frequently  it  is  also  desirable  to 
interdict  the  employment  of  tobacco,  tea,  and  coffee  Benefit  occa- 
sionally occurs  from  the  graduated  reduction  of  the  amount  of  liquid 
taken,  but  the  same  result  may  be  obtained  by  the  employment  of 
mild  saline  purgatives.  Generally  speaking,  it  is  well  to  avoid  the 
use  of  cardiac  tonics  such  as  digitalis,  and  of  cardiac  depressants 
such  as  aconite  or  veratrine ;  in  fact,  this  condition  is  one  which 
is  better  treated  by  hygienic  measures  than  by  the  free  use  of  drugs. 

During  the  last  few  years  much  has  been  said  of  the  value  of 
baths  and  exercises  in  the  treatment  of  heart  failure.  At  one  time 
cases  of  failure  of  compensation  were  rigidly  treated  by  rest,  but 
there  has  been  a  gradual  growth  of  opinion  that  in  properly  selected 
cases  various  forms  of  exercise  are  beneficial.  Oertel  recommended 
climbing,  and  thought  that  with  gradually  increasing  muscular  effort 
the  ventricle  might  be  induced  to  perform  more  efficient  work. 
Ling,  in  Sweden,  advocated  passive  exercises  of  the  limbs,  massage 
of  the  abdomen  and  spine,  together  with  movements  calculated  to 
expand  the  thorax.  A  third  form  of  exercise,  recommended  by 
Schott,  is  a  modification  of  Ling's  method,  and  consists  of  move- 
ments with  limited  resistance.  This  method  is  commonly  employed 
in  conjunction  with  baths  in  the  well-known  Nauheim  system,  and 
marvellous  results  have  been  claimed  in  the  treatment  of  a  variety 
of  forms  of  cardiac  weakness.  The  Nauheim  baths  may  be  imitated 
by  adding  to  a  forty-gallon  bath  five  pounds  of  sodium  chloride  and 
eight  ounces  of  calcium  chloride,  while  effervescence  is  produced  by 
the  addition  of  Sandow's  powders. 

The  immediate  effect  of  this  bath  is  to  cause  redness  of  the  sur- 
face, while  the  pulse  becomes  slow  and  regular  and  the  heart's  action 
more  vigorous.  It  has  been  claimed  that  the  area  of  cardiac  dulness 
is  diminished  and  the  position  of  the  apex  beat  is  altered  after  the 
use  of  these  baths ;  but  some  observers  maintain  that  these  observa- 
tions are  fallacious,  and  that  the  diminution  of  the  area  of  cardiac 
dulness  does  not  correspond  to  a  decrease  in  the  size  of  the  heart, 


FATTY  DEGENERATION.  31 

but  that  it  is  due  to  more  complete  expansion  of  the  lung.  There 
is  little  profit  to  be  gained  from  discussing  this  point,  since  there  is 
now  general  agreement  in  favor  of  the  treatment,  although  there  is 
abundant  evidence  that  great  care  must  be  exercised  in  the  selection 
of  cases.  It  is  coutraindicated  with  advanced  stages  of  arterial 
sclerosis,  with  acute  and  chronic  nephritis,  and  with  aneurism  of 
the  aorta ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  the  usual  indications  of  cardiac 
failure — oedema,  hydrothorax,  or  hydropericardium — do  not  appear 
to  add  to  the  risks  of  the  treatment.  The  most  suitable  cases  are 
those  of  enfeebled  heart,  with  or  without  marked  dilatation,  and 
with  or  without  organic  valvular  lesion. 

Fatty  Degeneration.  Fatty  degeneration  frequently  occurs  as 
a  sequel  of  many  prolonged  fevers  which  are  ordinarily  marked  by 
wasting ;  thus  it  is  common  after  typhus  and  typhoid  fever,  and  it 
occurs  in  addition  in  connection  with  phosphorous  poisoning.  When 
resulting  from  such  causes  it  is  not  likely  to  have  any  serious  sequelae, 
nor  does  it  require  any  special  line  of  treatment.  The  indications 
which  are  ordinarily  followed  during  convalescence  are  those  which 
are  applicable  to  this  condition.  Thus  it  is  advisable  to  encourage 
moderate  but  gradually  increasing  exercise,  and  to  employ  iron  and 
other  tonics  to  improve  the  general  condition  of  the  health.  The 
patient's  dietary  should  also  be  rendered  nourishing  and  digestible. 

A  more  serious  form  of  fatty  degeneration  is  that  which  ensues 
after  the  prolonged  existence  of  various  cardiac  lesions ;  thus  in 
advanced  stages  of  aortic  disease,  more  particularly  among  the  poorer 
classes,  the  hypertrophied  muscle  almost  invariably  undergoes  fatty 
degeneration,  and  the  treatment  of  such  cases  necessarily  resolves 
itself  into  the  treatment  of  uncompensated  disease  of  the  aortic 
valves.  Fatty  degeneration  also  occurs  with  some  frequency  as  a 
result  of  impaired  nutrition,  owing  to  atheromatous  changes  in  the 
coronary  arteries ;  and  in  such  cases  the  prominent  symptoms  are 
dyspncea,  even  on  slight  exertion,  and  a  sense  of  weight  upon  the 
chest,  from  which  the  patient  endeavors  to  free  himself  by  taking 
deep  breaths  from  time  to  time,  so  that  the  respiration  is  often  of  a 
sighing  nature.  Frequently  under  these  conditions  the  patients 
suffer  from  sleeplessness  at  night,  while  they  tend  to  doze  off  at  odd 
times  during  the  day,  drowsiness  being  more  particularly  marked 
after  meals.  In  addition,  these  patients  are  subject  to  true  attacks 
of  angina  pectoris,  the  attacks  being  perhaps  rather  more  common 
at  night.     As  with  other  cases  of  angina,  these  symptoms  are  fre- 


32  CIRCULATION. 

qaently  conjoined  with  those  of  impaired  digestion  ;  in  fact,  it  is 
often  diflficult  to  differentiate  the  anginal  attacks  from  similar  palpi- 
tation and  cardiac  discomfort  primarily  due  to  dyspepsia — that  is  to 
say,  it  may  sometimes  be  a  little  difficult  to  decide  whether  to  treat 
the  heart  or  the  digestive  system  for  the  relief  of  the  pains.  Cases 
of  fatty  degeneration  due  to  senile  changes  always  require  the  utmost 
care  in  dieting,  both  with  a  view  of  eliminating  those  articles  which 
are  prone  to  produce  palpitation,  and  with  a  view  of  adopting  that 
form  of  dietary  which  is  most  likely  to  favor  the  nutrition  of  the 
cardiac  muscle.  Thus  it  is  almost  imperative  to  discontinue  the  use 
of  tea,  coffee,  and  tobacco.  Sometimes  tea  in  a  dilute  form  may  be 
allowed,  especially  if  careful  instructions  are  given  to  avoid  taking 
it  at  too  high  a  temperature ;  and  occasionally  also  it  may  be  well 
to  allow  a  very  moderate  employment  of  tobacco,  since  in  some 
cases  this  appears  to  act  as  a  sedative  if  smoked  at  night.  I  have 
frequently  seen  moderate  indulgence  in  tobacco  at  night  followed  by 
beneficial  results  in  individuals  who  were  previously  not  addicted 
to  its  use ;  but  the  amount  requires  to  be  carefully  limited,  since,  if 
indulged  in  too  freely,  it  is  apt  to  increase  palpitation  and  digestive 
disturbances. 

Perhaps  in  no  other  class  of  cases  does  the  use  of  alcohol  require 
greater  discretion.  If  taken  in  excess  it  undoubtedly  favors  degen- 
erative changes ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  if  taken  occasionally  when 
there  is  much  disturbance  from  palpitation,  or  when  there  is  some 
tendency  to  syncope,  pure  forms  of  alcohol  will  undoubtedly  do 
good  ;  in  other  words,  in  these  cases  alcohol  is  to  be  regarded  purely 
as  a  drug  and  not  as  a  drink.  From  the  occasional  need  of  addi- 
tional cardiac  stimulants,  some  patients  find  it  advisable  to  carry 
with  them  a  small  pocket  flask  containing  either  brandy  or  whiskey 
for  use  in  emergencies. 

The  tendency  to  shortness  of  breath  on  exertion  naturally  suggests 
the  avoidance  of  stairs  and  hills,  and  further  renders  it  necessary  to 
advise  that  all  undue  hurry  should  be  avoided.  Warnings  should 
also  be  given  against  crowded,  ill- ventilated  rooms,  which  frequently 
increase  the  sense  of  weight  within  the  thorax.  With  sudden  at- 
tacks of  shortness  of  breath  and  palpitation  it  is  sometimes  desirable 
to  administer  diffusible  stimulants,  as,  for  example,  a  mixture  of 
equal  parts  of  aromatic  spirit  of  ammonia  and  spirit  of  ether.  A 
teaspoonful  of  such  a  mixture  given  in  cold  water,  followed  by  a 
draught  of  warm  water,  will  frequently  relieve  discomfort,  especially 


FUNCTIONAL  PALPITATION.  33 

if  the  patient  is  encouraged  to  assume  the  recumbent  posture.  Some 
benefit  may  result  from  the  occasional  employment  of  preparations 
of  nux  vomica  or  strychnine  in  conjunction  with  iron.  Thus  the 
following  may  be  given  three  times  a  day  : 


ii  • — Stryclininse  hydrochloratis 

Acidi  nitrohydrochlorici  diluti 
Liquoris  ferri  chloridi 
Aquae  chloroformi    . 
Aquse  destillatae 


.      gr.  f^. 
ad     .Ij. 


On  the  other  hand;  digitalis  and  strophanthus  and  other  cardiac 
tonics  give  very  little  relief.  Attempts  have  been  made  occasionally 
to  stimulate  nutrition  by  mild  courses  of  massage,  but  however  bene- 
ficial this  may  be  in  increasing  the  nutrition  of  a  neurasthenic,  I 
have  not  seen  any  advantage  from  its  employment  in  cases  due  to 
senile  changes.  Although  various  hypnotics  have  been  employed 
in  this  condition,  they  seem  to  give  less  relief  than  is  obtainable  from 
the  administration  of  small  quantities  of  food  or  of  stimulants  at 
bedtime.  The  treatment  of  attacks  of  angina  does  not  materially 
differ  from  that  of  other  forms  of  angina  pectoris. 

Functional  Palpitation.  Although  palpitation  is  frequently 
associated  with  mitral  disease,  it  is  far  more  common  for  complaint 
of  this  symptom  to  be  made  when  there  is  no  obvious  disease  of  the 
heart.  The  causes  are  extremely  various,  the  condition  sometimes 
resulting  from  a  neurasthenic  tendency,  sometimes  from  anaemia,  and 
very  often  from  dyspepsia,  which  may  take  its  origin  in  some  error  of 
diet,  the  principal  errors  likely  to  produce  this  condition  being  exces- 
sive use,  or,  rather,  abuse,  of  alcohol,  tea,  and  tobacco.  This  enumer- 
ation of  the  causes  naturally  suggests  that  the  treatment  necessary 
is  essentially  the  treatment  of  the  cause,  and  that  the  treatment  is 
likely  to  be  a  complete  failure  unless  the  true  cause  has  been  recog- 
nized. Thus,  among  neurotic  cases  it  is  occasionally  possible  to 
discover  an  underlying  cause  of  the  neurosis  and  to  treat  this  by 
judicious  advice.  When  palpitation  occurs  in  connection  with  aiise- 
mia  or  chlorosis,  efforts  must  be  made  to  correct  these  conditions 
by  the  administration  of  iron.  The  frequent  employment  of  iron 
pills,  or  of  powders  of  reduced  iron,  will  probably  remove  the  cause 
and  so  allay  the  symptoms.  In  both  of  these  classes  of  cases  some 
benefit  may  occasionally  be  obtained  from  the  use  of  bromides,  am- 
monium bromide  being  perhaps  more  commonly  used  than  potassium 
bromide,  which  has  been  credited  with  a  depressing  action. 

3 


34  CIRCULATION. 

When  the  condition  results  from  dyspepsia,  it  is  obviously  desir- 
able to  ascertain  and  remove  the  cause  o£  the  dyspepsia.  Functional 
palpitation  is,  however,  frequently  the  result  of  imperfect  mastica- 
tion, and  can  be  cured  either  by  encouraging  the  patient  to  spend 
more  time  over  meals  and  to  eat  more  slowly,  or,  if  the  teeth  are 
imperfect,  by  adopting  suitable  dental  measures.  I  have  often  seen 
cases  of  palpitation  due  to  dyspepsia  cured  by  an  efficient  set  of  arti- 
ficial teeth,  or  by  having  the  teeth  judiciously  stopped,  so  that  masti- 
cation may  be  properly  performed.  In  dyspeptic  cases  relief  may 
sometimes  be  afforded  by  the  use  of  gastric  sedatives  or  of  aperients. 
Bismuth  carbonate,  bismuth  salicylate,  and  hydrocyanic  acid  will 
sometimes  remove  symptoms  of  chronic  gastric  catarrh. 

Angina  Pectoris.  The  treatment  of  angina  pectoris  divides  itself 
naturally  into  two  forms  :  first,  the  treatment  during  the  attacks 
of  pain,  and,  second,  the  treatment  during  the  intervals  of  pain. 
Angina  is  a  condition  which  manifests  itself  in  a  variety  of  different 
cases,  and  while  it  is  far  more  prone  to  occur  with  some  forms  of 
cardiac  lesion,  notably  with  troubles  connected  with  the  aortic 
valve,  it  is,  nevetherless,  met  with  in  connection  with  numerous 
forms  of  disordered  action  of  the  heart.  Further,  although  this 
symptom  is  frequently  absent  in  cases  which  might  be  expected  to 
be  complicated  v^th  angina,  yet  when  once  an  attack  of  true  angina 
has  occurred  it  is  extremely  liable  to  recur.  As  the  causes  are  so 
various,  it  is  always  necessary  to  ascertain  the  cause  or  causes  in  the 
individual  case,  and  these  in  turn  may  be  regarded  as  first  predis- 
posing causes,  and  secondly  exciting  causes.  When  the  warning 
note  has  once  been  sounded,  it  is  necessary  in  the  interval  to  guard 
against  and  to  treat  the  conditions  liable  to  provoke  attacks,  while 
during  the  attack  the  treatment  must  be  confined  to  the  relief  of 
pain.  This  relief  is  very  largely  afforded  by  the  use  of  nitrites ; 
concerning  their  modes  of  action  there  has  been  some  difference  of 
opinion,  although  they  undoubtedly  act  as  vasodilators,  and  thus 
reduce  the  blood-pressure.  It  has  been  thought  that  the  beneficial 
influence  exerted  in  cases  of  angina  is  due  to  their  action  as  anal- 
gesics. The  idea  that  the  mode  of  action  does  not  necessarily  depend 
upon  vasodilation  is  to  some  extent  supported  by  the  variations  in 
the  pulse  in  different  cases  of  angina.  In  some  patients  the  pulse 
is  almost  imperceptible,  while  in  others,  though  regular,  it  appears 
to  be  of  high  tension.  The  pain  of  angina  has  been  likened  to  a 
sense  of  constriction  around  the  heart.     Patients  have  said  that  they 


ANGINA  PECTORIS.  35 

felt  as  if  tlieir  heart  were  frequently  grasped,  and  the  sense  of  con- 
striction excites  pam  radiating  across  the  chest  and  usually  shooting 
down  the  left  arm,  sometimes  also  down  the  right.  During  the  pain 
there  is  a  sense  of  anxiety,  and  the  patient  is  afraid  to  take  another 
step,  and  usually  remains  grasping  a  stick  or  any  convenient  sup- 
port, waiting  for  the  relief  to  occur.  During  the  attack  the  face  is 
generally  pale  and  the  surface  may  be  clammy.  Though  these  symp- 
toms may  last  but  a  few  seconds  before  sudden  relief  is  obtained, 
sometimes  the  attack  is  more  prolonged. 

Of  all  drugs  that  have  been  recommended  for  the  treatment  of 
this  condition,  amyl  nitrite  gives  the  quickest  and  greatest  relief. 
A  glass  capsule,  containing  3  to  5  minims,  is  crushed  in  a  handker- 
chief and  the  vapor  is  inhaled,  and  ordinarily  as  the  vasomotor 
relaxation  becomes  marked  the  pain  passes  off,  frequently  with  the 
eructation  of  flatus  from  the  stomach.  Amyl  nitrite,  however,  does 
not  prove  efficient  in  all  cases.  Some  patients  prefer  to  use  some 
preparation  of  nitroglycerin,  and  even  with  this  drug  individual 
idiosyncrasies  have  to  be  considered.  The  spirit  glonoin  of  the 
United  States  Pharmacopoeia,  in  J  to  2-minim  doses,  is  sometimes 
preferred ;  while  in  other  individuals  the  nitroglycerin  tablets,  con- 
taining one-hundredth  of  a  grain,  appear  to  exert  a  more  lasting  and 
beneficial  effect. 

Schott,  of  Nauheim,  thinks  that  nitroglycerin  is  most  active  when 
given  in  a  liquid  medium  and  combined  with  tincture  of  capsicum, 
rectified  spirit,  and  peppermint  water. 

Bradbury  suggests  that  in  many  cases  of  cardiac  pain  it  might  be 
possible  to  anticipate  and  prevent  anginal  seizures  by  the  adminis- 
tration of  erythrol  tetranitrate  or  mannitol  hexanitrate,  which  possess 
the  vasodilating  properties  of  the  nitrites,  but  produce  their  effects 
upon  the  blood-pressure  more  slowly,  the  action  being  also  less 
evanescent.  Erythrol  tetranitrate  may  be  given  in  doses  of  1  grain, 
in  the  form  of  pills  or  tablets,  or  in  alcoholic  solution.  Bradbury 
suggests  that  a  solution  of  erythrol  tetranitrate  of  the  strength  of  one 
in  sixty  may  be  made,  and  that  1  drachm  may  be  given  in  an  ounce 
of  water  every  four  or  six  hours. 

Another  drug  which  is  frequently  employed  is  sodium  nitrite, 
given  in  doses  of  from  1  to  2  grains.  Whichever  remedy  is  pre- 
ferred it  should  be  at  hand  for  immediate  use  when  previous  attacks 
have  warned  the  patient  of  the  possibility  of  a  recurrence.  Failing 
this,  relief  may  sometimes  be  afforded  by  diffusible  stimulants ;  a 


36  CIRCULATION. 

lialf-drachm  or  drachm  dose  of  spirit  of  ether  with  water,  or  an 
equivalent  dose  of  ammonium  carbonate  or  even  of  brandy,  will 
occasionally  reduce  pain.  In  some  cases  pain  is  more  prolonged 
and  defies  the  action  of  these  remedies,  and  some  observers  recom- 
mend the  use  of  inhalations  of  chloroform  or  ether — a  plan  of  treat- 
ment which  has  hitherto  found  but  few  adherents.  Hypodermic 
injections  of  morphine  are  occasionally  of  service  in  attacks  of  long 
duration,  but  it  is  advisable  when  using  this  drug  to  administer  also 
cardiac  stimulants,  such  as  a  mixture  of  equal  parts  of  spirit  of  ether 
and  of  aromatic  spirit  of  ammonia.  When  no  drugs  are  available, 
relief  may  sometimes  be  afforded  by  hot  applications  over  the  heart, 
and  by  immersing  the  feet  and  hands  in  hot  water. 

With  regard  to  the  treatment  during  the  interval  between  the 
attacks,  with  care  the  exciting  causes  may  sometimes  be  avoided ; 
thus  it  is  Avell  known  that  attacks  of  angina  very  often  occur  in 
connection  with  flatulent  distention  of  the  stomach — a  condition 
likely  to  result  from  dyspepsia  or  from  errors  in  diet.  To  a  large 
extent,  also,  these  attacks  frequently  follow  severe  mental  agitation 
or  over-exertion.  Among  the  other  predisposing  causes  may  be 
enumerated  conditions  likely  to  favor  degenerative  changes  of  the 
heart,  especially  in  connection  with  aortic  disease  ;  conditions  tend- 
ing to  produce  cardiac  irregularity,  such  as  the  injudicious  employ- 
ment of  tea,  coffee,  tobacco,  or  alcohol,  which  may  in  addition  favor 
dyspeptic  troubles  ;  and  in  some  instances  attacks  of  angina  appear 
to  be  frequent  with  a  gouty  diathesis.  These  predisposing  and  ex- 
citing causes  are,  to  a  large  extent,  within  the  reach  of  treatment. 
It  is  accordingly  necessary  to  advise  the  avoidance  of  habits  calcu- 
lated to  favor  such  attacks,  and,  further,  to  treat  the  dyspeptic 
symptoms  when  present.  Attention  must  always  be  paid  to  the 
diet,  which  must  be  rendered  nutritious  and  easily  assimilable. 
Advantage  sometimes  results  from  the  employment  of  pepsin  or 
pancreatin,  and  in  general  some  relief  may  be  afforded  by  the  admin- 
istration of  moderate  doses  of  well-diluted  alkalies,  an  hour  or  more 
before  the  chief  meals  of  the  day. 

The  treatment  of  flatulent  dyspepsia  is  dealt  with  in  detail  in 
another  place.  It  may  here  be  suflicient  to  enjoin  the  daily  employ- 
ment of  aloetic  dinner  pills  or  of  small  doses  of  saline  purgatives. 
Occasionally  great  advantage  results  from  the  use  of  small  doses  of 
podophyllin,  or  of  some  mercurial  preparation,  such  as  blue  mass. 

Patients  subject  to  angina  pectoris  frequently  suffer  from  anaemia 


SYNCOPE  AND   COLLAPSE.  37 

and  general  weakness,  and  for  the  relief  of  these  symptoms  iron 
and  digitalis  may  be  employed  as  in  other  cases  of  heart  disease. 
The  following  mixture  may  be  given  three  times  a  day  : 

R. — Tincturse  digitalis       .......  TTLv. 

Liquoris  ferri  chloridi        ......  TTL^v. 

Spiritus  chloroformi Hlx. 

Infusi  quassise    .         .         .         .         .         .       q.  s.  ad  ^j. 

The  hsematinic  effect  of  iron  may  even  be  increased  by  the  simulta- 
neous administration  of  arsenic,  and  in  some  cases  arsenic  appears 
to  be  preferable  to  preparations  of  iron.  In  using  arsenic,  however, 
it  is  advisable  to  watch  closely  for  any  symptoms  of  disturbance  of 
digestion,  which  are  likely  to  be  produced  if  the  drug  is  given  in 
overdose  or  for  too  great  a  length  of  time.  The  weakness  may 
sometimes  be  counteracted  by  the  administration  of  preparations  of 
quinine  or  of  strychnine,  the  latter  in  particular  acting  as  a  cardiac 
tonic  : 


K. — Quininse  sulphatis 

Acidi  sulphurici  diluti 
Tincturse  cardamomi  compositse 
Aquae         .  .  .  .         . 

U. — Strychuinse  hydrocliloratis 
Acidi  nitrici  diluti    . 
Acacise      .         .         .         .         . 
Aquae        ..... 


•  mij- 

.  TTlx. 

ad  Ij. 

•  gr.  ^■ 

.  gr.  xl. 

ad  §j. 


When  there  is  reason  to  suspect  the  existence  of  much  arterial  degen- 
eration, potassium  iodide  occasionally  gives  great  relief  if  employed 
continuously  in  fairly  large  doses,  from  10  to  15  grains  three  times 
a  day.  The  beneficial  effects  of  potassium  iodide  are  most  marked 
in  gouty  cases  ;  and  when  the  symptom  appears  to  be  associated  with 
aneurismal  dilatations,  potassium  iodide  may  also  often  prove  more 
beneficial  than  any  other  drug. 

Syncope  and  Collapse.  These  symptoms  are  frequently  linked 
in  severe  cases,  though  the  former,  syncope  or  fainting,  may  occur 
as  a  passing  weakness  under  many  relatively  unimportant  conditions, 
where  the  removal  of  the  cause  generally  suffices  to  effect  recovery. 
A  bad  atmosphere  or  an  overcrowded,  heated  room,  especially  if  asso- 
ciated with  emotional  surroundings,  may  favor  syncope,  and  indicate 
the  advisability  of  removal  to  fresh  air,  the  recumbent  posture,  and 
the  loosening  of  any  constrictions  about  the  neck  or  chest,  which 
impede  freedom  of  respiration  and  of  circulation.  For  slight  attacks 
little  more  will  be  needed.     It  is  necessary  to  emphasize  the  impor- 


38  CIRCULATION. 

tance  of  keeping  the  head  low,  and  of  promoting  respiration  and 
circulation  by  cold  affusion,  and,  if  available,  by  the  stimulant  action 
of  aromatic  spirit  of  ammonia  or  of  water  of  ammonise  cautiously 
held  a  reasonable  distance  from  the  nostrils.  When,  however,  uncon- 
sciousness continues  in  spite  of  these  measures,  it  will  be  necessary 
to  promote  respiration  and  circulation  by  the  hypodermic  injection 
of  some  stimulant,  such  as  alcohol,  ether,  or  ammonium  carbonate,  ~ 
while  artificial  respiration  may  be  performed  gently  and  slowly. 
Circulation  may  also  be  favored  by  rubbing  the  hands  and  arms,  or 
the  feet  and  legs,  the  frictions  being  directed  along  the  course  of  the 
veins  toward  the  heart.  An  electric  current  or  a  series  of  mild 
shocks  may  be  passed  along  the  phrenic  nerve  or  over  the  heart, 
while  stimulation  of  the  diaphragm  is  frequently  of  some  service. 
When  syncope  results  from  severe  pain,  from  hemorrhage,  or  from 
perforation  of  one  of  the  abdominal  viscera,  warmth  of  the  extremi- 
ties must  be  maintained  by  hot  water  bottles  and  hot  blankets  ;  while 
shock  is  to  be  counteracted  by  the  hypodermic  use  of  morphine,  in 
full  dose. 

With  severe  hemorrhage  it  may  be  advisable  to  perform  trans- 
fusion, but  this  operation  does  not  give  very  satisfactory  results,  in 
spite  of  the  numerous  modifications  which  have  been  recommended, 
such  as  the  use  of  defibrinated  blood,  etc.;  upon  the  whole,  greater 
benefit  has  been  derived  from  the  intravenous  injection  of  from 
twenty  to  thirty  ounces  of  warm  weak  saline  solution  consisting  of 
0.6  per  cent,  of  sodium  chloride.  This  saline  solution  has  given  ex- 
cellent results,  and  it  is  free  from  the  risk  of  causing  the  entrance 
of  coagula  into  the  circulation.  In  injecting  saline  solution  into 
the  veins  great  care  must  be  taken  to  avoid  the  introduction  of 
air,  which  would  be  followed  by  disastrous  consequences.  Fortu- 
nately, it  has  been  found  that  benefit  follows  the  subcutaneous  in- 
jection of  a  saline  solution,  which  is  far  less  hazardous,  though  its 
beneficial  results  are  not  so  immediately  apparent,  owing  to  the 
time  required  for  its  absorption.  When,  as  the  consequence  of 
hemorrhage  or  other  source  of  shock,  the  heart  continues  to  beat 
feebly,  benefit  may  follow  the  subcutaneous  injection  of  strychnine 
and  of  digitalin,  especially  if  ether  is  simultaneously  employed. 

The  performance  of  operations  during  collapse  must  be  deter- 
mined by  the  nature  of  the  cause.  In  collapse  due  to  perforation  of 
a  typhoid  or  gastric  ulcer  it  is  desirable  to  operate  as  soon  as  possi- 
ble, since  delay  must  involve  serious  damage  to  the  peritoneum  by 


SYNCOPE  AND  COLLAPSE.  39 

contamination  with  the  contents  of  the  intestine  or  the  stomach  ; 
and,  although  the  operation  is  necessarily  severe,  it  is  often  found 
that  the  character  of  the  pulse  will  improve,  even  during  the  ad- 
ministration of  the  ansesthetic.  In  most  other  cases  of  collapse  it 
is  well  to  postpone  operation  until  the  circulatory  system  has  more 
fully  recovered  its  natural  tone.  With  shock  due  to  hemorrhage, 
recovery  may  be  hastened  by  the  application  of  an  Esmarch's  band- 
age to  the  lower  extremities. 

It  remains  to  mention  the  treatment  of  arrested  circulation  and 
respiration  during  the  administration  of  an  auEesthetic.  This  may 
sometimes  result  from  a  paralytic  condition  of  the  tongue,  which 
falls  back  in  the  pharynx  and  prevents  the  entrance  of  air  to  the 
glottis  ;  with  the  first  indication  of  danger  the  tongue  therefore 
should  be  drawn  forward  forcibly,  and  respiratory  movements 
should  be  stimulated  by  compressing  the  thorax  momentarily  and  by 
raising  the  arms  above  the  head  so  soon  as  the  compression  of  the 
lower  costal  margin  is  relaxed.  No  time  should  be  lost  in  invert- 
ing the  patient  if  respiration  does  not  ensue,  while  stimulants,  such 
as  ammonia  or  ammonium  carbonate,  should  be  held  near  the 
mouth  and  nostrils,  so  that  they  may  be  inhaled  with  the  first  re- 
turning movements  of  respiration,  and  thus  influence  the  circulatory 
system.  Benefit  is  sometimes  obtained  from  the  similar  use  of 
capsules  of  amyl  nitrite,  and  after  the  heart  has  resumed  work  its 
contractions  may  be  further  stimulated  by  the  subcutaneous  injec- 
tion of  brandy  or  ether.  Even  when  it  is  not  necessary  to  perform 
inversion,  it  is  desirable  to  remove  all  pillows  and  to  place  the  head 
of  the  patient  on  the  level,  or  even  a  little  below  the  level  of  the 
body,  so  as  to  favor  the  circulation  through  the  brain,  which  is 
essential  for  the  due  stimulation  of  the  respiratory  and  circulatory 
centres. 


CHAPTEE   II. 

CIRCULATION— Cb^^mwed 

Aneurism — Ansemia — Chlorosis — Pernicious  Anaemia — Leucocythsemia — Lympha- 
denoma  -  Diseases  of  the  Thyroid  Gland:  Goitre,  Exophthalmic  Goitre, 
Myxoedema — Addison's  Disease. 

Aneurism.  Aneurisms  of  the  aorta,  either  within  the  thorax  or 
in  the  abdomen,  or  aneurisms  of  the  large  arteries  starting  from  the 
aorta  within  these  regions,  are  the  only  forms  of  aneurisms  which 
come  almost  entirely  under  the  care  of  the  physician.  Aneurism 
appears  always  to  result  from  the  overstrain,  either  accidental  or 
continuous,  of  a  vessel  which  has  already  been  weakened  by  some 
chronic  disease.  The  disease  which  is  most  prone  to  give  rise  to 
aneurism  is  syphilis,  which  originates  a  special  form  of  arteritis. 
The  symptoms  referable  to  aortic  aneurism  are  of  two  classes  : 
those  which  result  directly  from  pressure  upon  adjacent  structures, 
and  those  dependent  upon  alterations  within  the  sac  of  the  aneurism 
during  its  growth.  The  progress  of  both  form  of  symptoms  may 
be  arrested  or  retarded  by  any  change  which  influences  the  rapidity 
of  the  ventricular  contractions  and  simultaneously  diminishes  the 
force  of  the  ventricular  contractions.  If,  at  the  same  time,  the 
tendency  of  the  blood  to  coagulate  can  be  increased,  the  resulting 
benefit  is  likely  to  be  more  permanent.  The  method  which  gives 
the  best  results  is  the  limitation  or  regulation  of  the  mode  of  life, 
more  particularly  with  regard  to  exercise,  combined  with  the  ad- 
ministration of  comparatively  large  doses  of  potassium  iodide.  This 
drug  may  be  given  in  cases  free  from  any  suspicion  of  syphilitic 
origin,  and  it  relieves  pain  partly  by  lowering  the  blood  tension  and 
partly  by  reducing  the  rapidity  of  the  cardiac  contractions.  It  may 
be  given  in  full  doses,  from  10  to  20  or  even  30  grains,  three  times 
a  day.  The  dose,  however,  is  largely  dependent  upon  the  produc- 
tion of  symptoms  of  iodism.  It  is  well  known  that  some  patients 
bear  large  doses  more  easily  than  small  doses,  but  the  discomfort 
which  may  result  from  employing  this  drug  may  be  so  great  as  to 
prohibit  its  use.  In  some  cases  it  has  appeared  to  me  tha,t  moder- 
ate doses  prove  more  beneficial  than  large  doses,  and  when  once 


ANEURISM.  41 

pain  has  been  relieved  I  have  hesitated  to  increase  the  amount  of 
potassium  iodide. 

The  influence  of  iodide  is  somewhat  difficult  to  explain.  It  has 
been  suggested  that  by  exerting  a  stimulant  effect  upon  the  kidneys 
it  causes  increased  tendency  to  coagulation  of  the  blood,  and  thus 
favors  the  formation  of  a  solid  clot  within  the  sac  of  the  aneurism. 
It  has  also  been  suggested  that  it  may  stimulate  the  wall  of  the  sac 
and  cause  its  contraction  ;  but  inasmuch  as  the  aneurismal  wall  is 
devoid  of  muscular  tissue,  this  explanation  is  unsatisfying.  In 
place  of  potassium  iodide  the  sodium  salt  has  been  recommended  as 
being  less  liable  to  produce  symptoms  of  iodism,  and  being  also 
less  depressant.  In  some  cases  the  combination  of  bromide  with 
iodide  has  appeared  to  give  greater  relief  of  pain.  One  of  my 
patients  has  been,  for  the  last  eighteen  months,  taking  ammonium 
bromide  with  potassium  iodide,  and  during  that  time  many  of  the 
more  urgent  symptoms — the  dysphagia,  cough,  and  pain  in  the 
upper  part  of  the  thorax — have  undergone  marked  improvement. 
From  time  to  time  I  have  employed  in  addition  small  doses  of 
opium.  The  camphorated  tincture  of  opium  is  well  tolerated,  and 
will  often  give  continuous  relief  when  the  aneurism  is  not  rapidly 
increasing  in  size. 

It  is  necessary  in  every  case  of  aneurism  to  lunit  the  amount  of 
exercise.  In  some  cases  rest  in  bed  appears  to  be  essential,  while 
in  others,  in  the  early  stages  at  least,  degenerative  changes  seem  to 
be  less  marked  if  the  patient  can  pursue  his  ordinary  occupation 
without  undergoing  any  undue  strain  or  exertion.  It  is  often 
preferable  to  allow  the  patient  to  retain  some  interest  in  life  rather 
than  to  reduce  him  to  the  hopeless  condition  of  regarding  himself 
as  incurable.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  advisable  to  pay  strict  atten- 
tion to  the  nature  of  the  food,  which  should  be  rendered  as  nutri- 
tious as  possible,  while  the  amount  of  liquid  taken  is  reduced  in 
amount.  The  treatment  of  aneurism  recommended  by  Valsalva 
consisted  in  reducing  the  blood-pressure  by  frequent  venesection. 
Tufnell's  method  of  rest  and  starvation  aimed  at  reducing  the  quan- 
tity of  blood  and  increasing  its  coagulability  ;  he  recommended 
that  patients  should  be  kept  in  bed  for  three  months  or  more,  and 
that  the  amount  of  liquid  taken  should  be  reduced  to  eight  ounces 
in  the  twenty-four  hours.  This  interference  with  -the  ordinary 
habits  is  apt  to  cause  depression  of  spirits  and  to  lead  to  rapid, 
irregular  action  of  the  heart,  while  at  the  same  time  the  general 


42  CIRCULATION. 

nutrition  appears  to  suffer  from  the  strict  limitation  of  the  quantity 
of  fluids  ;  and  the  only  cases  in  which  Tufnell's  treatment  is  likely 
to  prove  beneficial  are  those  in  which  the  aneurism  is  sacculated 
instead  of  fusiform. 

Not  many  years  ago  electrolysis  was  introduced  in  the  treatment 
of  aneurism,  it  being  well  known  that  currents  of  electricity  can 
cause  coagulation  of  the  blood.  The  method  employed  consisted  in 
passing  two  or  more  needles  into  the  sac  of  the  aneurism  and  con- 
necting them  with  the  positive  pole  of  the  battery,  while  the  nega- 
tive pole  was  applied  upon  the  adjacent  surface.  The  current  use 
was  comparatively  weak,  and  it  was  only  employed  for  ten  or  fifteen 
minutes  at  a  time.  The  needles  were  always  connected  with  the 
positive  pole,  as  the  coagulum  thus  produced  was  found  firmer  and 
more  coherent  than  when  the  negative  pole  was  connected  with  the 
needles.  Another  precaution  which  was  deemed  advisable  was  to 
prevent  the  damage  of  cutaneous  structures  of  the  walls  of  the  sac 
by  coating  the  needles,  except  at  the  extremities,  with  some  non- 
conducting material.  Under  the  use  of  electrolysis,  aneurismal 
dilatations  of  the  aorta  have  occasionally  been  seen  to  become  less 
pulsatile,  and  have  then  caused  less  pain  ;  but  the  improvement  in 
both  these  directions  has  appeared  to  be  of  a  temporary  nature,  and 
the  process  is  not  altogether  devoid  of  risk.  The  needles  are  always 
passed  toward  the  sides  of  the  sac  rather  than  into  its  centre,  in  the 
hope  of  favoring  the  deposition  of  a  laminated  clot  on  the  wall  of 
the  sac.  If  introduced  freely  into  the  centre,  there  is  considerable 
risk  of  the  detachment  of  portions  of  clot,  and  of  their  passage  into 
the  general  circulation.  Another  method,  that  at  one  time  attracted 
considerable  attention  and  that  has  now  been  almost  entirely  dis- 
carded, consisted  in  fav^oring  the  formation  of  clot  within  the  sac  of 
the  aneurism  by  introducing  a  large  amount  of  some  foreign  body 
which,  by  causing  obstruction  to  the  onward  flow  of  blood,  would 
favor  the  deposition  of  clot.  Large  quantities  of  fine  iron  or  steel 
wire  have  been  employed  ;  watch-springs  and  horsehair  have  also 
been  introduced,  but  the  clot  that  has  formed  around  these  has 
been  found  to  be  of  somewhat  loose  consistency,  and  therefore 
has  constituted  a  source  of  danger  from  the  risk  of  producing  em- 
bolism. 

Surgical  assistance  has  sometimes  been  invoked  in  these  cases  of 
thoracic  or  abdominal  aneurism,  but  this  treatment  is  less  satisfac- 
tory than  when  applied  to  branches  of  smaller  vessels.     Sometimes 


ANEURISM.  43 

large  branches  of  vessels  leading  from  the  aorta  have  been  ligatured 
with  a  view  of  reducing  the  force  of  the  blood  current  through  the 
sac  of  the  aneurism.  When  the  aneurism  is  situated  near  the  com- 
mencement of  the  aorta,  ligature  of  the  common  carotid,  or  of  the 
innominate,  or  of  one  of  the  subclavian  arteries  has  been  performed, 
but  the  results  cannot  be  said  to  have  been  encouraging ;  and  in 
ligaturing  vessels  of  such  size  there  is  always  some  risk  of  serious 
new  symptoms,  due  to  the  interference  of  circulation  in  important 
organs.  It  has  been  laid  down  as  a  rule  that  distal  ligature  should 
not  be  performed  when  there  is  evidence  of  general  atheroma,  since 
under  such  circumstances  there  will  be  great  risk  of  causing  rupture 
of  important  vessels  by  interfering  with  the  normal  distribution  of 
pressure.  The  logical  result  of  such  ruling  would  be  to  prevent  all 
surgical  treatment,  because  the  existence  of  aneurism  is  in  itself  an 
evidence  of  considerable  arterial  degenerative  change. 

For  the  relief  of  pain  various  local  applications  in  the  vicinity  of 
the  aneurism  have  been  recommended,  and  of  these  the  most  useful 
are  preparations  containing  morphine  or  atropine.  These  may 
either  be  injected  subcutaneously  near  the  aneurism,  or  liniments  or 
plasters  of  opium  or  belladonna  may  be  applied  over  the  seat  of 
pulsation.  It  is  at  least  an  open  question  whether  the  relief  from 
the  application  of  a  plaster  is  not  to  a  large  extent  due  to  restrained 
movement.  Ice  bags  have  occasionally  been  used  with  the  objects  of 
relieving  pain,  of  lowering  blood-pressure,  and  of  favoring  coagula- 
tion. The  force  and  frequency  of  the  heart  are  both  reduced  during 
the  application  of  cold,  and  in  this  way,  as  well  as  by  its  numbing 
influence,  pain  may  be  greatly  relieved ;  but  this  measure  is  only 
palliative  and  not  curative,  since  coagulation  is  in  no  way  hastened 
by  cold.  It  is  worth  bearing  in  mind  that  under  the  influence  of 
the  local  application  of  cold  the  heart's  action  may  be  so  far  reduced 
in  force  as  to  occasion  symptoms  of  collapse,  and  should  such 
symptoms  arise  it  is  necessary  to  treat  them  with  cardiac  stimulants, 
such  as  hot  alcoholic  liquids.  Similar  symptoms  are  often  pro- 
duced when  treating  pericarditis  or  pneumonia  with  ice  bags  placed 
over  the  cardiac  area. 

In  many  cases  of  thoracic  aneurism  special  symj)toms  may  arise 
and  require  special  treatment ;  thus  in  some  cases  the  patient  may 
be  tormented  by  frequency  of  cough,  which  is  evidently  due  to  the 
pressure  of  the  aneurismal  growth  upon  the  trachea  or  upon  one  of 
the  bronchi.     Although  in  such  cases  there  may  be  some  expector- 


44  CIRCULATION. 

ation  of  tenacious  mucus,  the  formation  of  this  mucus  appears  to  be 
entirely  due  to  the  frequency  of  the  straining  efforts  of  coughing 
and  to  the  irritation  upon  the  wall  of  the  trachea  or  bronchus.  It 
is  not  likely,  therefore,  to  be  amenable  to  the  ordinary  forms  of 
treatment  of  bronchitis.  The  greatest  chance  of  relief  is  afforded 
by  measures  which  cause  diminution  in  the  size  of  the  aneurismal 
sac,  and  therefore  reduction  of  the  pressure  it  exerts  upon  the  air 
passages.  Hence  potassium  iodide  will  often  cause  diminution  of 
this  troublesome  symptom.  To  some  extent,  however,  the  irrita- 
bility of  the  air  passages  may  be  controlled  by  the  internal  admin- 
istration of  small  doses  of  opium  or  of  bromides,  preferably  the 
former,  which  has  the  further  beneficial  action  of  reducing  the  secre- 
tion from  the  mucous  membrane.  The  dysphagia  due  to  aneurismal 
enlargements  may  similarly  be  to  some  extent  influenced  by  the 
use  of  potassium  iodide  and  of  opium.  In  all  probability  the  dys- 
phagia is  frequently  due  to  irritation  of  the  vagus  rather  than  to 
direct  pressure  upon  the  oesophagus,  since  in  some  cases  of  aneurism 
the  difficulty  of  swallowing  is  experienced  with  liquids  rather  than 
with  solids.  Sometimes  patients  are  obliged  to  drink  by  swallow- 
ing only  small  quantities  of  liquid  at  a  time,  so  as  to  avoid  trouble- 
some spasm  ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  spasm  may  occasionally  be 
favored  by  sipping,  while  it  may  be  avoided  by  drinking  copious 
draughts.  These  uncertainties  of  the  forms  of  dysphagia  appear 
to  indicate  the  nervous  origin  of  the  symptom,  and  therefore 
readily  explain  the  extreme  benefit  sometimes  experienced  from  the 
administration  of  sedatives. 

The  aphonia  due  to  unilateral  paralysis  of  the  abductor  muscles 
is  scarcely  within  reach  of  treatment ;  but  in  exceptional  cases, 
although  pressure  is  only  exerted  upon  one  recurrent  laryngeal 
nerve,  abductor  paralysis  may  affect  the  muscles  of  both  sides,  so 
that  the  vocal  cords  fall  together  and  reduce  the  aperture  of  the 
glottis.  This  reduction  in  the  size  of  the  glottis  is  occasionally  so 
great  that  ti'acheotomy  must  be  performed  for  its  relief.  It  is 
scarcely  necessary  to  say  that  when  the  dyspnoea  connected  with 
aneurism  is  due  to  pressure  on  the  trachea,  instead  of  to  paralysis 
of  the  abductor  muscles,  the  operation  of  tracheotomy  is  not  to  be 
considered.  As  in  other  forms  of  dilatation  of  the  ventricle,  par- 
oxysms of  pain  amounting  to  true  angina  may  be  experienced,  and 
are  to  be  treated  like  angina  pectoris,  with  amyl  nitrite,  nitro- 
glycerin, or  spirit  of  nitrous  ether,  remedies  which,  by  dilating  the 


ANEMIA.  45 

peripheral  vessels,  reduce  the  blood-pressure,  and  thus  diminish 
strain  upon  the  walls  o£  the  ventricle. 

Bradbury  thinks  that  the  use  of  potassium  iodide  in  aneurism, 
as  in  other  cases  of  cardiac  pain,  might  often  be  replaced  by  erythrol 
tetranitrate,  which  would  more  effectually  dilate  the  peripheral 
arteries,  and  thus  contribute  to  keeping  the  circulatory  system  as 
far  as  possible  in  a  state  of  physiological  rest. 

Anaemia.  Anaemia  occurs  in  various  forms,  either  as  a  secondary 
result  of  some  previous  disease,  or  as  the  most  prominent  symptom 
of  a  special  disease.  The  former  is  frequently  termed  symptomatic 
or  secondary  anaemia,  while  the  latter  includes  forms  of  anaemia 
seen  in  chlorosis,  in  pernicious  antemia,  in  leucocythaemia,  and  in 
lymphadenoma.  To  some  extent,  also,  this  symptom  occurs  in  con- 
nection with  Addison's  disease,  with  exophthalmic  goitre,  and  with 
myxoedema.  Although  the  reduction  in  the  number  of  red  corpus- 
cles or  the  proportion  of  haemoglobin  present  in  the  blood  varies 
considerably  in  these  different  diseases,  they  are  all  characterized 
by  some  degree  of  pallor,  by  breathlessness  on  exertion,  palpitation, 
and  tendency  to  slight  oedema  of  the  lower  extremities,  the  ten- 
dency to  oedema  being  most  marked  in  connection  Avith  chlorosis,  in 
which  the  oedema  disappears  from  the  ankles  and  feet  during  the 
night  and  is  found  as  slight  puffiness  below  the  eyelids  in  the  early 
morning. 

Symptomatic  or  secondary  anaemia  is  the  form  which  is  seen  after 
Avasting  diseases  or  after  surgical  operations  involving  great  loss  of 
blood,  or  after  hemorrhages  from  other  causes.  The  treatment  of 
this  form  of  anaemia  is  largely  dependent  upon  the  cause.  The 
dieting  generally  must  be  rendered  as  nutritious  as  possible,  and  the 
amount  of  nitrogenous  food  must  be  gradually  increased.  It  is 
necessary  to  observe  some  caution  in  the  dieting  of  these  patients, 
since  if  nitrogenous  food  is  given  in  excess  it  may  readily  disturb 
the  digestion,  which  is  generally  feeble.  The  dieting  of  symptom- 
atic anaemia  occurring  after  conditions  like  typhoid  fever  neces- 
sarily requires  considerable  judgment.  It  is  customary  to  progress 
gradually  from  liquid  to  solid  food,  commencing  with  easily  digested 
articles  like  fish  and  boiled  chicken,  and  only  passing  onward  to 
meat  when  the  system  appears  to  have  become  accustomed  to  the 
increased  dietary.  In  these  cases  improvement  also  results  from 
careful  attention  to  the  hygienic  surroundings  of  the  individual. 
The  patient  frequently  benefits  by  a  change  of  air,  especially  by  a 


46  CIRCULATION. 

resort  to  the  sea ;  bat  even  before  such  a  change  is  possible,  great 
improvement  may  be  obtained  from  gradually  increasing  exercise 
in  the  open  air. 

Inasmuch  as  these  patients  with  secondary  ansemia  suffer  from 
alterations  of  temperature,  they  should  be  warmly  clad,  and  their 
rooms  should  be  well  ventilated  and  as  spacious  as  possible.  With 
regard  to  medicinal  treatment,  the  various  preparations  of  iron  are 
commonly  employed.  The  non-astringent  forms  are  preferred,  as 
constipation  is  so  frequently  a  prominent  symptom.  The  compound 
of  iron  to  be  employed  in  any  particular  case  may  require  frequent 
change  according  to  the  idiosyncrasy  of  the  patient.  Some  patients 
do  well  with  increasing  quantities  of  ferrous  sulphate,  or  of  sulphate 
given  with  potassium  carbonate,  as  in  Blaud's  pills.  Enormous  num- 
bers of  these  pills  can  be  consumed  without  causing  any  material 
interference  with  the  digestive  powers,  but  it  is  essential  that  the 
pills  should  be  freshly  prepared,  since  otherwise  they  may  pass 
through  the  alimentary  canal  unchanged  ;  to  obviate  this  danger 
the  ingredients  of  Blaud's  pills  are  sometimes  given  in  a  form  whii  h 
is  readily  soluble,  as  in  small  gelatine  capsules.  Other  patients 
prefer  to  take  reduced  iron,  but  although  this  is  tasteless,  it  is  some- 
what repulsive  in  appearance,  and  it  may  cause  unpleasant  eructa- 
tions. The  compound  iron  mixture  of  the  Pharmacopoeia  may 
occasionally  be  employed  as  well  as  the  saccharated  iron  carbonate. 
In  ansemia  during  convalescence  the  chloride  frequently  gives  the 
best  results,  although  there  is  some  prejudice  against  this  drug  on 
account  of  its  unpleasant  taste,  and  also  because  it  sometimes,  if 
given  in  too  large  doses  or  for  too  long,  causes  disturbance  of  diges- 
tion. It  has  also  been  credited  with  producing  discoloration  of  the 
teeth,  but  this  objection  can  be  overcome  either  by  taking  the  drug 
through  a  glass  mouth-piece  or  by  rinsing  the  mouth  with  water 
immediately  after  it  has  been  taken.  When  it  is  desirable  to  con- 
tinue the  use  of  small  doses  of  iron  for  a  length  of  time,  the  iron 
and  ammonium  citrate  may  be  employed.  This  compound  is,  on 
account  of  its  comparatively  pleasant  taste  — comparatively  only — 
peculiarly  adapted  to  children. 

The  efficiency  of  Blaud's  pills  can  to  some  extent  be  increased  by 
the  addition  of  a  small  quantity  of  iron  arsenate  ;  but  when  this 
compound  is  employed  the  number  of  pills  that  can  be  given  must 
be  regulated  by  the  amount  of  iron  arsenate,  since  dyspeptic  symp- 
toms are  readily  produced  by  overdoses.     Some  practitioners  prefer 


CHLOROSIS.  47 

to  administer  iron  in  the  form  of  chalybeate  water,  and  anaemic 
patients  are  often  sent  to  various  spas  and  springs  to  drink  the 
waters.  The  principal  chalybeate  springs  in  England  are  at  Tun- 
bridge  Wells,  Strathpeffer,  and  Harrogate  ;  on  the  Continent  those 
most  in  vogue  are  Schwalbach,  Orezza,  Marienbad,  Pyrmont,  Spa, 
and  Homburg,  and  in  the  United  States  the  Jordan  Alum  Springs 
and  Rockbridge  Alum  Springs.  The  benefit  of  the  continental  spas 
are  to  some  extent  increased  by  the  employment  of  the  chalybeate 
waters  as  baths.  Most  of  the  waters  so  used  contain  free  carbonic 
acid,  which  is  credited  with  stimulating  the  cutaneous  surface. 

Chlorosis.  Reference  has  already  been  made  to  the  pallor,  short- 
ness of  breath,  palpitation,  and  tendency  to  oedema  which  occur  in 
connection  with  chlorosis  ;  but,  in  addition  to  these  discomforts, 
patients  frequently  complain  of  obstinate  constipation  and  of  con- 
siderable dyspeptic  trouble.  Chlorosis  is  most  common  among 
young  girls  from  the  ages  of  fifteen  or 'sixteen  to  twenty-one  or 
twenty-two.  Frequently  the  most  troublesome  symptoms  are  those 
connected  with  indigestion,  and  sometimes,  if  these  symptoms  are 
treated  sufficiently  early,  the  subsequent  course  of  the  disease  is  very 
much  curtailed  ;  broadly  speaking,  it  is  generally  useless  to  attempt 
to  treat  chlorosis  wth  hsematinics,  without  at  the  same  time  paying 
attention  to  the  functions  of  the  digestive  organs.  Many  observers 
consider  that  the  disease  has  its  origin  in  defective  action  of  the 
digestive  system,  by  means  of  which  the  iron  salts  administered  in 
an  organic  state  in  the  food  fail  to  enter  the  circulatory  system,  and 
therefore  cause  no  increase  of  haemoglobin.  This  idea  forms  the 
basis  of  Bunge's  theory  of  the  absorption  of  iron  in  chlorosis.  It 
is  well  known  that  in  these  cases  very  large  amounts  of  iron  have 
to  be  given  to  produce  a  relatively  small  amount  of  haemoglobin,  or, 
in  other  words,  that  the  iron  administered  medicinally  is  largely 
excreted  through  the  digestive  system  without  ever  having  been 
thoroughly  absorbed  into  the  blood.  Some  writers  have  gone  so 
far  as  to  assert  that  inorganic  compounds  are  not  absorbed  from  the 
alimentary  canal.  Very  many  experiments  have  been  made  with  a 
view  to  determine  this  point.  In  an  able  review  of  recent  investi- 
gations, Leech^  discusses  the  question  as  to  whether  iron  possesses 
the  power  of  preventing  changes  in  the  food,  or  whether  it  acts  by 
exerting  a  stimulating  influence  on  the  mucous  membrane  ;  and  he 

^  Medical  Chronicle,  September,  1896. 


48  CIRCULATION. 

concludes  that  the  balance  of  evidence  tends  to  show  that  iron  in 
its  various  compounds  is  absorbed  by  the  small  intestine,  or  at  least 
by  the  duodenum,  and  that  it  is  stored  up  in  various  organs,  chiefly 
in  the  liver  and  spleen,  and  thence  is  utilized  in  the  formation  of 
haemoglobin. 

It  is  perhaps  to  be  regretted  that  so  much  attention  has  been 
devoted  to  the  theoretical  and  pharmacological  aspect  of  the  absorp- 
tion of  iron,  since  it  is  doubtless  owing  to  this  uncertainty  of  absorp- 
tion from  the  alimentary  canal  that  some  observers  have  recom- 
mended the  hypodermic  use  of  iron  ;  thus  Da  Costa^  advises  that 
ferrous  manganese  citrate  should  be  given  hypodermically  in  3- 
grain  doses,  while  L§pine^  advocates  the  hypodermic  injection  of 
a  4  per  cent,  solution  of  citrate  of  iron,  and  asserts  that  injections 
of  3  o.c.  or  4  c.c.  of  this  solution  produced  very  marked  improve- 
ment in  a  woman  in  whom  treatment  with  bone-marrow  had  practi- 
cally failed.  These  modes  of  administration  appear  to  be  entirely 
dictated  by  theoretical  considerations,  and  in  practice  they  are  found 
to  be  wholly  unnecessary.  In  the  ordinary  treatment  of  chlorosis 
it  is  well  to  commence  by  dealing  with  any  dyspeptic  trouble,  to 
relieve  flatulence  by  the  administration  of  small  doses  of  ammonium 
carbonate  and  rhubarb,  and  if  there  is  much  complaint  of  heart- 
burn to  use  one  or  other  of  the  insoluble  forms  of  bismuth.  Simul- 
taneously with  this  remedy,  however,  it  will  be  necessary  to  employ 
some  mild  laxative,  and  preference  is  generally  given  to  the  pill  of 
aloes  and  myrrh,  or  of  aloes  and  iron,  and  it  is  possible  that  in 
some  of  these  cases  the  aloetic  pill  may  assist  in  restoring  the 
menstrual  function.  So  soon  as  the  patient  is  able  to  digest  an 
ordinary  light  meal  without  trouble,  the  treatment  with  iron  may 
be  commenced  to  a  certain  extent.  The  form  of  iron  to  be  em- 
ployed for  any  lengthened  period  must  be  determined  by  the 
results  of  experiment.  Reduced  iron  is  often  given  in  a  powder, 
which  the  patient  is  directed  to  take  between  two  slices  of  bread 
and  butter.  In  this  form,  however,  iron  is  somewhat  repulsive  in 
appearance,  and  it  sometimes  gives  rise  to  unpleasant  eructations. 
The  iron  and  ammonium  citrate  is  more  pleasant,  it  can  be  con- 
tinued for  a  greater  length  of  time,  and  can  also  always  be  given  in 
solution.  It  has  the  disadvantage,  however,  of  not  allowing  the 
dose  to  be  appreciably  increased,  and  it  requires  to  be  administered 

1  Therapeutic  Gazette,  May  15,  1896.  ^  gemaine  Medicale,  May  26,  1897. 


CHLOROSIS.  49 

for  a  lengthy  period.  Ferrous  sulphate  has  perhaps  given  more 
general  satisfaction,  and  in  the  form  of  Bland's  pills  enormous 
quantities  have  been  administered  daily.  In  this  pill  the  sulphate 
is  converted  into  the  carbonate  during  the  time  that  the  pill  is 
undergoing  solution  within  the  stomach.  As  already  indicated, 
these  pills  should  be  freshly  prepared,  as  they  tend  to  become  hard 
and  insoluble.  In  the  new  British  Pharmacopceia  an  attempt  has 
been  made  to  meet  this  objection  to  the  iron  pill,  and  it  is  now 
directed  to  be  prepared  with  exsiccated  ferrous  sulj)hate  and  exsic- 
cated sodium  carbonate  ;  the  pill  mass  is  then  incorporated  with 
gum  acacia,  with  a  relatively  small  proportion  of  tragacanth.  The 
amount  of  ferrous  carbonate  in  each  pill  remains,  however,  the  same 
as  formerly.  I  have  frequently  found  that  the  efficacy  of  this  pill 
is  increased  by  the  addition  of  a  small  amount  of  iron  arsenate  ; 
but,  as  I  have  already  said,  when  the  latter  drug  is  administered, 
the  number  of  pills  which  can  be  given  at  any  one  time  is  greatly 
reduced,  since  the  arsenate  tends  to  disorder  digestion  if  employed 
in  large  quantity.  Many  other  drugs  have  been  recommended  in 
the  treatment  of  chlorosis  ;  thus  compounds  of  manganese  and  com- 
pounds of  arsenic  have  been  used,  but  the  results  obtained  are  not 
equal  to  those  which  follow  the  administration  of  iron.  Other  more 
stringent  forms  of  iron  are  sometimes  used  ;  thus  the  solution  of 
dialyzed  iron  was  at  one  time  employed  in  the  form  of  drops,  or 
mixed  with  glycerin.  The  saccharated  iron  carbonate  is  often  given, 
and  the  compound  mixture  of  iron  still  finds  favor  with  many 
practitioners.  Of  non-official  remedies,  red  bone-marrow  is  perhaps 
the  one  which  has  been  most  used  ;  it  is  stated  to  have  given  good 
results  in  some  cases  of  chlorosis,  although  it  has  been  used  more 
particularly  in  cases  of  pernicious  anaemia. 

Patients  with  chlorosis  generally  require  to  be  encouraged  to  take 
out-door  exercise,  to  struggle  against  the  natural  tendency  to  inac- 
tivity, and  to  engage  in  some  cheerful  continuous  occupation  which 
leaves  little  time  for  morbid  fancies.  When  they  complain  of  ex- 
cessive cardiac  pain  on  slight  exertion,  benefit  may  soiuetimes  be 
derived  from  the  administration  of  small  doses  of  strophanthus  or 
of  digitalis  ;  but  these  remedies  require  to  be  employed  with  con- 
siderable discretion. 

Improvement  often  ensues  with  change  of  air  and  scene  ;  while 
a  course  of  iron  waters  may  effect  a  marvellous  change  in  inveterate 
cases  ;  but  in  many  of  these  patients  it  is  probable  that  a  course  of 

4 


_  5o\ 
2ch% 


CIRCULATION. 


eate  springs  is  more  likely  to  do  good  when  taken  at  the 
souKal  instead  of  at  home.  In  all  probability  the  change  of  scene 
play^fa  large  element  in  the  curative  results. 

P^nicious  Anaemia.  Pernicious  anaemia  has  also  been  termed 
idiopathic  or  progressive  pernicious  anaemia,  and  presents  many 
rq^^ked  differences  from  the  forms  of  ansemia  which  have  been 
considered.  It  has  been  said  to  be  somewhat  more  common  in 
males  than  in  females,  but  the  cases  which  have  been  collected  show 
that  the  numbers  affected  are  almost  identical.  In  this  respect, 
however,  it  forms  a  marked  contrast  to  chlorosis,  which  is  essen- 
tially a  disease  of  females.  The  symptoms  strongly  resemble  those 
of  chlorosis,  but  the  skin  is  more  usually  yellowish  in  tint,  and 
sometimes  jaundice  may  be  present ;  and  these  cases  further  differ 
in  tending  gradually  to  death  from  asthenia,  even  though  there  is 
but  little  indication  of  wasting.  The  number  of  corpuscles  is  very 
considerably  reduced,  although  the  amount  of  haemoglobin  in  the 
individual  corpuscles  may  be  increased.  The  red  corpuscles  present 
great  variations  in  size,  and  nucleated  red  corpuscles  may  often  be 
found.  Indications  of  disturbance  of  digestive  functions  are  fre- 
quent, and  occasionally  diarrhoea  may  be  present.  The  urine  is 
sometimes  highly  colored  and  contains  an  excess  of  urobilin,  but 
occasionally  it  is  of  low  specific  gravity  and  pale. 

It  has  been  stated  that  this  disease  is  fatal  in  the  majority  of 
■cases,  yet  a  few  have  been  recorded  in  which  the  symptoms  were 
arrested,  although  in  some  patients  there  was  a  marked  tendency  to 
relapse.  Pernicious  anaemia  appears  to  be  entirely  uninfluenced  by 
the  administration  of  iron,  but  benefit  has  been  reported  from  the 
use  of  increasing  doses  of  liquor  potassii  arsenitis,  of  which  drug 
these  patients  exhibit  a  marked  tolerance  ;  so  that  20  or  even  30 
minims  of  Fowler's  solution  may  be  taken  three  times  a  day  for 
weeks  or  even  months.  Fraser^  has  stated  that  he  obtained  striking 
results  from  the  use  of  uncooked  red  bone-marrow,  and  Bans  has 
recorded  a  case  of  recovery  with  the  use  of  red  bone-marrow  when 
arsenic  had  not  only  failed  to  do  good,  but  had  even  increased  the 
severity  of  the  symptoms.  Red  bone-marrow  may  be  obtained  from 
the  ribs  or  from  the  cancellous  ends  of  the  long  bones,  and  it  is  also 
now  obtainable  either  in  the  form  of  tabloids  or  as  a  glycerin  ex- 
tract. When  suffering  from  pernicious  anaemia  it  is  always  desirable, 

^  British  Medical  Journal,  June  2,  1894. 


LEUGOCYTHMMIA.  51 

on  account  of  the  increasing  weakness,  to  keep  the  patient  in  bed, 
and  to  encourage  nutrition  by  means  of  gentle  massage. 

Leucocythsemia.  Leucocytheemia  is  a  form  of  anaemia  associated 
with  great  enlargement  of  the  spleen,  and  the  ansemic  appearance 
results  from  the  greatly  increased  number  of  white  corpuscles.  To 
some  extent,  also,  the  absolute  number  of  red  corpuscles  is  reduced.. 
Although  in  many  cases  a  history  of  ague  may  be  wanting,  yet  in 
a  certain  proportion  there  seems  to  be  some  etiological  connection 
with  ague.  When  this  history  can  be  obtained,  the  treatment 
necessarily  includes  the  administration  of  quinine,  which  may  be 
used  in  large  doses  twice  or  three  times  a  day.  Sometimes,  during 
the  administration  of  quinine,  the  splenic  tumor  materially  dimin- 
ishes in  size ;  but  frequently,  especially  in  cases  without  definite 
history,  quinine  is  of  little  avail,  and  the  disorder  must  be  treated 
with  other  forms  of  tonics.  Large  doses  of  arsenic  have  been  given 
in  some  cases  with  remarkable  success,  but  to  be  of  any  service  this 
treatment  must  be  long  continued,  and  care  must  be  taken  that  it 
does  not  disturb  the  digestive  functions.  Benefit  may  frequently 
be  obtained  from  improved  hygienic  conditions  ;  occasionally  a  sea 
voyage  may  be  of  service,  and  when  the  patient's  home  is  in  a 
malarial  district  it  is  essential  that  he  should  move  either  to  the 
seaside  or  to  a  hilly  district.  With  the  view  of  increasing  the  forma- 
tion of  red  corpuscles  oxygen  inhalations  have  been  given,  but  these 
do  not  appear  to  have  produced  any  permanent  benefit.  The 
splenic  enlargement  has  sometimes  been  attacked  directly  either  by 
currents  of  electricity  or  by  surgical  methods  ;  but  operative  meas- 
ures have  not,  so  far,  given  encouraging  results,  owing  to  the  ex- 
treme liability  to  fatal  hemorrhage.  Various  compounds  of  iodine 
have  been  used  both  internally  and  externally  :  thus  potassium 
iodide  has  been  given  in  10-grain  doses,  and  the  liniment  of  potas- 
sium iodide  has  been  applied  over  the  abdomen.  An  ointment  of 
red  iodide  of  mercury  has  also  been  used,  and  for  all  these  forms 
of  treatment  some  benefit  has  been  claimed.  As  a  whole,  however, 
it  is  well  to  remember  that  improvement  is  likely  to  be  but  tem- 
porary, and  that  these  cases  usually  pass  on  gradually  to  a  fatal 
termination  ;  indeed,  it  has  been  doubted  whether,  except  in  the 
very  early  stages,  any  form  of  treatment  is  to  be  credited  with 
much  success.  The  disease  may  be  complicated  by  numerous  symp- 
toms, such  as  those  of  hemorrhage,  pleurisy,  or  peritonitis,  which 
must  be  treated  upon  general  principles. 


52  CIRCULATION. 

Lymphadenoma,  or  Hodgkin's  Disease.  This  disease  in  many 
of  its  symptoms  resembles  leucocythsemia,  bnt  it  is  associated  with 
great  enlargement  of  the  lymphatic  glands,  while  the  splenic 
enlargement  does  not  form  such  a  prominent  feature.  Although 
increasing  ansemia  is  associated  with  enlargement  of  the  lymphatic 
glands,  the  symptoms  vary  greatly  with  the  site  of  the  glands 
chiefly  affected.  So  long  as  these  are  superficial  the  symptoms  are 
chiefly  those  of  progressive  ansemia ;  but  when  the  glands  within 
the  thorax  are  involved,  serious  symptoms  may  sometimes  result 
from  their  pressure  upon  the  bronchi  or  upon  the  intrathoracic 
vessels.  This  disease  has  been  treated  in  the  same  way  as  the  pre- 
ceding, with  arsenic,  with  tonics,  and  with  iodides,  but  the  results 
of  treatment  are  not  sufficiently  satisfactory  to  call  for  further 
detail.  The  greatest  benefit  appears  to'have  resulted  from  hygienic 
measures,  but  these  do  not  afford  any  prospect  of  materially  retard- 
ing the  fatal  ending  of  the  disease. 

Diseases  of  the  Thyroid  Gland :  Goitre.  Goitre  consists  in 
enlargement  or  hypertrophy  of  the  thyroid  gland  ;  it  commonly 
occurs  endemically,  and  is  rarely  associated  Avith  any  marked  symp- 
toms, unless  the  thyroid  enlargement  is  sufficient  to  compress  the 
trachea,  or  to  interfere  with  the  circulation  by  the  growth  extend- 
ing partially  below  the  sternum  and  causing  pressure  upon  the 
veins.  The  enlargement  is  sometimes  unifomi,  affecting  the  whole 
of  the  thyroid  gland  ;  but  one  lobe  may  be  much  more  affected 
than  the  other  ;  and  sometimes  the^isthmus  only  is  involved.  When 
of  moderate  size,  little  inconvenience  results  from  the  thyroid 
enlargement ;  hence  many  cases  do  not  present  themselves  for  treat- 
ment. When,  however,  the  disease  has  developed  somewhat  rapidly, 
it  is  advisable  to  remove  the  patient  from  the  district  in  which  it 
has  originated. 

The  common  form  of  treatment  of  mild  cases  involves  the  free  use 
of  iodine  and  of  iodides.  Iodine  may  be  applied  locally  either  as 
the  ointment  or  as  the  tincture.  It  is  rarely  necessary  to  apply  the 
strong  solution  of  iodine,  since  it  produces  undesirable  blistering, 
especially  if  frequently  applied.  Some  practitioners  advocate  the 
introduction  of  iodine  into  the  substance  of  the  thyroid ;  but 
although  this  treatment  is  credited  with  having  produced  beneficial 
results,  it  not  uncommonly  fails,  more  particularly  in  the  cystic 
form  of  the  disease,  and  it  is  associated  with  ^certain  dangers,  of 
which  the  chief  are  the  possible  injury  of  a  large  vein,  and  the 
admission  of  air. 


EXOPHTHALMIC  GOITRE.  53 

The  tincture  of  iodine  is  frequently  adniinisterecl  internally  in 
doses  of  from  2  to  5  minims  ;  but  potassium  iodide  is  somewhat 
more  manageable,  and  does  not  produce  so  much  discomfort  and 
gastric  irritation  if  employed  over  a  length  of  time.  The  dose 
must,  to  some  extent,  be  regulated  by  the  effect  upon  the  goitre, 
and  also  upon  the  appetite,  since  when  taking  potassium  iodide 
complaint  is  frequently  made  of  the  unpleasant  bitter  or  metallic 
taste  which  results  from  the  elimination  of  the  drug  by  the  salivary 
glands  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  if  the  dose  is  greatly  increased, 
symptoms  of  iodism  may  be  produced. 

If  the  goitre  increases  in  size  in  spite  of  the  above  measures,  more 
energetic  treatment  may  be  adopted,  such  as  the  application  of  the 
strong  solution  of  iodine,  or  the  more  certain  vesication  by  a  blister- 
ing liquid.  Occasionally  goitre  is  associated  with  much  anaemia, 
and  iron  preparations  may  be  of  some  service  ;  but  their  value  is 
likely  to  be  much  increased  by  their  combination  with  arsenic, 
which  may  also  be  sometimes  employed  alone  as  an  alterative  tonic 
in  the  form  of  the  liquor  potassii  arsenitis. 

When  symptoms  of  obstruction  occur,  operative  measures  must 
be  adopted.  It  is  unnecessary  here  to  discuss  the  operation  that 
should  be  performed,  but  in  general  there  is  considerable  reluctance 
to  deal  with  cases  of  uniform  enlargement  by  total  extirpation  of 
the  gland,  since  the  result  of  the  removal  of  the  whole  gland  is  to 
favor  the  development  of  myxoedema.  Hence,  in  general,  the  por- 
tion of  the  gland  which  is  causing  compression  on  the  trachea  or 
the  veins  is  the  only  part  removed,  and  at  all  times  an  effort  is 
made  to  leave  a  considerable  portion  of  gland  tissue.  The  surgical 
treatment  of  cystic  forms  of  goitre  is  a  great  deal  more  hopeful, 
since  it  is  infrequently  possible  to  drain  the  cyst  and  to  excite  suffi- 
cient inflammatory  action  to  cause  the  destruction  of  the  cyst  wall. 
For  details  concerning  these  operative  measures,  and  also  for  argu- 
ments relating  to  the  excision  of  the  cyst,  the  reader  is  referred  to 
surgical  manuals. 

Exophthalmic  Goitre.  The  enlargement  of  the  thyroid  in  this 
disease  is  associated  with  protrusion  of  the  eyeballs  and  with  a 
varying  degree  of  disturbance  of  the  vascular  system,  which  is 
marked  commonly  by  an  increased  rapidity  of  the  pulse,  even 
during  periods  of  repose,  with  very  great  increase  in  the  pulse-rate 
on  slight  emotional  excitement.  This  condition  is  frequently  ac- 
companied  by  much  anaemia  and  emaciation,  and   sometimes  by 


54  CIRCULATION. 

distinct  alteration  in  the  mental  condition  of  the  patient,  who  be- 
comes low-spirited  and  irritable. 

The  most  prominent  symptoms  for  which  the  patient  seeks  relief 
are  those  connected  with  the  circulatory  system,  and  in  early  days 
it  is  not  uncommon  for  the  nature  of  the  disease  to  be  overlooked 
and  for  the  symptoms  to  be  attributed  mainly  to  anaemia. 

Many  remedies  have  been  recommended  for  this  condition,  but 
in  my  hands  the  best  results  have  been  afforded  by  the  conjunction 
of  arsenic  with  digitalis,  or  strophanthus,  to  check  the  rapidity  of 
the  heart's  action.  The  amount  of  anaemia  frequently  necessitates 
the  use  of  iron.  The  success  of  the  treatment  is,  however,  extremely 
uncertain  ;  and  the  remedies  above-mentioned  must  be  continued 
for  long  periods,  both  with  the  view  of  curing  the  anaemia,  and  of 
maintaining  a  steady  control  over  the  rapidity  of  cardiac  action.  It 
is  not  advisable  to  increase  the  dose  of  digitalis  or  of  strophanthus, 
in  the  hope  of  obtaining  a  pulse  of  physiological  rate,  since  an  in- 
crease in  the  amount  of  these  remedies  may  produce  irregularity  of 
action  and  perhaps  dangerous  syncope.  It  is  better  to  employ  only 
moderate  doses,  and  to  be  satisfied  with  general  reduction  in  the 
rapidity  of  the  pulse-rate.  Occasionally  I  have  used  with  some 
satisfaction  ammonium  or  potassium  bromide,  with  the  view  of 
controlling  the  nervous  symptoms  which  are  frequently  so  distress- 
ing in  this  disease  ;  but  with  these  drugs  also  it  is  desirable  to  em- 
ploy only  moderate  doses,  since,  although  the  irritability  of  temper 
may  be  diminished,  the  depression  is  certainly  sometimes  increased. 

Bromide  and  iodide  of  strontium  have  been  employed  for  ex- 
ophthalmic goitre  in  children  by  Gillespie^  with  exceedingly  favor- 
able results.  He  recommends  that  the  bromide,  on  account  of  its 
deliquescence,  should  be  given  in  solution  rather  than  in  powder. 
For  adults  he  employs  10  to  30  grains  of  the  bromide,  or  3  to  5 
grains  and  upward  of  the  iodide. 

Since  anaemia  is  such  a  prominent  symptom,  the  patient  should 
be  encouraged  to  live  mainly  in  the  open  air,  to  indulge  in  moder- 
ate exercise  so  long  as  this  does  not  materially  increase  the  rapidity 
of  the  heart's  action,  and  to  avoid  as  far  as  possible  all  sources  of 
excitement  or  irritation.  Many  observers  speak  highly  in  favor  of 
belladonna,  and  recommend  that  the  dose  should  be  gradually 
increased  until  some  dryness  of  the  throat  is  produced.     Although 

1  British  Medical  Journal,  October  8,  1898. 


MYXCEDEMA.  55 

I  have  frequently  used  this  remedy,  it  has  in  my  hands  scarcely 
justified  the  extreme  laudations  sometimes  lavished  upon  it.  Osier 
recommends  rest  in  bed,  with  an  ice  bag  or  Leiter's  tube  applied 
occasionally  over  the  heart  or  over  the  lower  part  of  the  neck  and 
manubrium  sterni. 

There  is  distinct  evidence  in  favor  of  the  use  of  galvanic  currents 
for  this  condition,  the  galvanism  of  the  sympathetic  and  pneumo- 
gastric  giving  temporary,  if  not  permanent,  improvement.  Whitla 
recommends  that,  in  applying  galvanism  to  the  sympathetic,  a 
Aveak  continuous  current,  not  exceeding  ten  or  twelve  Leclanch^ 
cells,  should  be  used.  The  negative  electrode  should  be  placed 
upon  the  lower  cervical  spines,  while  the  positive  is  moved  about 
upon  the  skin  in  front  of  the  sternomastoid  muscles  upon  each  side. 
The  positive  electrode  may  also  be  placed  over  the  region  of  the 
heart. 

Operative  measures,  such  as  ligature  of  the  arteries  of  the  thyroid, 
or  the  removal  of  some  portion  of  the  gland,  have  occasionally  been 
recommended,  but  they  have  not  hitherto  been  generally  adopted. 

Myxoedema.  Myxoedema  is  referred  anatomically  to  atrophy  of 
the  thyroid  gland,  but  the  symptoms  are  marked  by  mental  failure, 
by  localized  increase  in  the  thickness  of  the  skin,  which  causes  an 
increased  bulk  of  the  part  affected,  and  by  slight  general  fall  of 
temperature.  Three  forms  of  atrophy  of  the  thyroid  have  been 
recognized  :  a  congenital  form,  an  operative  form,  and  the  so-called 
myxoedema,  which  develops  most  frequently  in  females. 

Although  some  improvement  may  follow  measures  calculated  to 
improve  digestion  or  appetite,  the  treatment  of  this  disease  was 
extremely  unsatisfactory  prior  to  the  introduction  of  the  medicinal 
use  of  the  various  preparations  of  the  thyroid  gland.  It  was  at  one 
time  recommended  that  the  functions  of  the  skin  should  be  encour- 
aged by  diaphoretic  measures,  such  as  the  use  of  warm  baths,  or  the 
employment  of  jaborandi ;  while  alteratives,  like  arsenic,  were 
used  internally.  When  it  had  been  shown  by  experiment  that  the 
extirpation  of  the  thyroid  gland  produced  symptoms  of  this  disease, 
and  that,  in  animals,  these  symptoms  could  be  prevented  by  trans- 
planting the  thyroid  gland  from  another  animal,  the  thyroid  treat- 
ment was  within  measurable  distance  of  accomplishment,  and 
investigations  were  undertaken  to  ascertain  whether  the  active 
principles  of  the  gland  which  controlled  the  development  of  this 
disease  could  be  isolated  for  medical  purposes. 


56  CIBGULATION. 

The  hypodermic  mjection  of  glycerin  extracts  of  the  thyroid 
glands  of  the  sheep  was  followed  by  much  improvement,  and  it  was 
soon  ascertained  that  similar  improvement  resulted  from  the  ad- 
ministration of  the  thyroid  gland  by  the  mouth,  either  in  the  raw  or 
in  the  cooked  condition,  or  in  the  form  of  an  extract.  The  improve- 
ment has  been  so  marked  that  in  the  British  Pharmacopoeia  two 
preparations  of  thyroid  have  been  introduced — the  dry  thyroid 
(Thyroideum  Siccum),  which  is  used  in  doses  of  from  3  to  10  grains, 
and  the  thyroid  solution  (Liquor  Thyroidei),  which  is  administered 
in  doses  of  from  5  to  15  minims.  The  dry  thyroid  readily  deterior- 
ates on  exposure  to  the  air,  and  the  thyroid  solution  is  also  ex- 
tremely apt  to  undergo  decomposition.  Several  manufacturing 
firms  prepare  thyroid  in  the  form  of  tablets,  and  it  is  perhaps  in 
this  way  that  the  thyroid  is  most  commonly  administered. 

Dr.  J.  S.  Meltzer,  in  the  New  York  Medical  Journal,  May  25, 
1895,  states  that,  in  his  hands,  the  desiccated  powder  has  given 
better  results  than  the  tablets,  which  he  frequently  finds  will  not 
dissolve.  He  further  advocates  the  use  of  the  powder,  as  it  is  more 
easy  to  prescribe  different  quantities  at  will,  while  fractions  of  small 
tablets  cannot  be  measured  exactly. 

In  the  treatment  of  myxoedema  the  administration  of  thyroid 
must  be  continued  for  a  length  of  time.  One  of  the  first  signs  of 
improvement  is  the  rise  of  temperature  to  the  normal  point.  This 
is  quickly  followed  by  diminution  of  the  thickening  of  the  affected 
portions  of  the  skin,  and  by  loss  of  weight,  and,  if  the  treatment  is 
continued,  the  mental  powers  are  gradually  restored.  Occasionally 
symptoms  of  intolerance  develop  in  the  course  of  the  treatment, 
such  as  an  increased  rapidity  of  the  pulse,  a  slight  rise  of  temper- 
ature, or  signs  of  gastro-intestinal  irritation.  These  symptoms 
indicate  the  need  of  reducing  the  amount  of  thyroid  given,  or  of 
entirely  arresting  its  employment. 

Addison's  Disease.  Addison's  disease  is  marked  by  pigmenta- 
tion of  the  skin,  by  asthenia,  by  functional  disturbance  of  the  cir- 
culation, and  sometimes  also  by  digestive  disturbance.  There  is 
practically  no  doubt  that  the  disease  is,  in  some  way,  dependent 
upon  alterations  of  the  suprarenal  bodies — alterations  which  in- 
volve some  interference  with  their  secretory  functions,  and  may 
perhaps  also  cause  some  irritation  of  the  sympathetic  system. 

The  treatment  of  this  condition  must,  to  a  great  extent,  be 
symptomatic,  but  of  late  years  frequent  efforts  have  been  made  to 


ADDISON'S  DISEASE.  57 

supply  the  deficiency  of  the  suprarenal  secretion  by  measures  com- 
parable to  those  adopted  in  the  treatment  of  myxoedema. 

With  regard  to  the  symptomatic  treatment,  the  question  of  keep- 
ing the  patient  in  bed  must  be  determined  by  the  degree  of  weak- 
ness and  the  tendency  to  syncope.  With  marked  asthenia,  or  with 
frequent  fainting  fits,  there  is  no  doubt  about  this  point,  and  all 
forms  of  excitement  or  of  exertion,  as  well  as  exposure  to  cold,  must 
be  prevented.  The  disturbances  of  the  digestive  system  indicate 
the  necessity  for  a  nutritious  and  easily  digested  form  of  dietary, 
and  this  is  of  the  highest  importance  when  vomiting  occurs.  This 
symptom  indicates  a  liquid  diet,  given  in  small  quantities  at  short 
intervals,  the  use  of  ice,  and  of  effervescent  draughts  of  an  alkaline 
character. 

The  vomiting  of  Addison's  disease  is  sometimes  beneficially  influ- 
enced by  champagne,  the  stimulant  action  of  which  is  frequently  of 
great  service  in  improving  the  character  of  the  pulse.  Medicinal 
remedies  employed  in  ordinary  forms  of  vomiting,  such  as  salts  of 
bismuth,  or  small  doses  of  opium,  may  be  of  service,  but  it  is  better 
to  avoid  the  use  of  diluted  hydrocyanic  acid  on  account  of  its 
marked  action  upon  the  circulation. 

Diarrhoea  occasionally  occurs,  with  or  without  vomiting,  and 
must  be  controlled  by  modifications  of  diet  and  by  the  use  of 
astringent  remedies. 

It  is  sometimes  found  that  the  necessary  limitation  of  bodily 
movements  leads  to  chronic  constipation,  a  condition  which  cannot 
with  safety  be  left  unchecked,  although  the  remedies  for  this  symp- 
tom may  themselves  form  a  source  of  danger.  Strong  purgatives 
should  not  be  used,  as  they  may  produce  serious  symptoms  of  col- 
lapse ;  but  the  action  of  the  bowel  must  be  stimulated  partly  by  the 
use  of  enemata,  and  partly  by  the  administration  of  mild  purgatives 
in  moderate  doses. 

The  asthenia  calls  for  tonic  remedies,  and  foremost  among  these 
are  to  be  placed  arsenic,  iron,  quinine,  and  strychnine.  Iron  is  espe- 
cially indicated  in  the  not  infrequent  cases  where  anaemia  is  a 
prominent  symptom.     The  following  mixtures  are  often  used  : 

R. — Quininse  sulphatis     .......  gr.  ij. 

Acidi  sulphurici  diluti     ......  X([y. 

Aquae  cliloroformi    .         .         .         .         .         .         .  3  iv. 

Aquae  destillatse       .         .         .         .         .       q.  s.  ad  ^j. 


58 


ADDISON'S  DISEASE. 


R. — Strychninse  hydrochloratis 
Acidi  phosphorici  diluti 
Syrupi  zingiberis 
Aquae 

K  . — Quininse  sulphatis     . 
Acidi  sulphurici  diluti 
Ferri  sulphatis 
Aquae 


s.  ad 


3SS. 


.  mij- 

.     gr.  XX. 
ad    |j. 


Digitalis,  or  strophanthus,  may  be  given  when  there  is  much 
palpitation  and  Aveakness  of  the  circulation,  such  as  is  shown  by  a 
soft,  rapid,  feeble  pulse  ;  but  in  using  these  remedies  small  doses 
only  can  be  given,  since  vomiting  occasionally  follows  their  employ- 
ment. 

With  regard  to  the  special  treatment  of  the  disease,  the  raw 
suprarenal  bodies  of  the  sheep  have  been  given,  but  the  dried 
extract  appears  to  be  more  convenient.  The  extract  is  given  in 
1 -grain  doses  three  times  daily,  and  the  quantity  administered  is 
increased  gradually.  The  cases  published  give  somewhat  uncertain 
results  :  one  has  been  mentioned  where  death  occurred,  with  delir- 
ium and  collapse,  on  the  ninth  day  of  treatment ;  but,  in  general, 
the  treatment  appears  to  have  led  to  some  improvement  in  strength 
and  appetite.  This  improvement,  however,  seems  to  be  limited  to 
the  time  of  administration  of  the  suprarenal  gland  substance,  or  of 
the  dried  or  glycerin  extract,  and  the  utmost  that  can  at  present  be 
said  in  its  favor  is  that  the  progress  of  the  disease  may  possibly 
have  been  retarded. 


CHAPTER    III. 

EESPIEATION. 

Acute  Coryza,  or  Nasal  Catarrh — Chronic  Nasal  Catarrh— Hay  Fever,  or  Summer 
Catarrh  —  Epistaxis  —  Acute  Laryngitis  —  Chronic  Laryngitis  —  Tubercular 
Laryngitis — Syphilitic  Laryngitis — Hoarseness  and  Aphonia — Laryngismus 
Stridulus — False  Croup — Diphtheritic  Croup. 

Acute  Coryza,  or  Nasal  Catarrh.  This  condition  is  so  ex- 
tremely common,  and,  apart  from  its  inconvenience,  of  such  very 
little  importance,  that  it  does  not  often  come  under  the  hands  of  a 
medical  man  for  treatment.  Domestic  remedies  are  employed  with 
a  certain  degree  of  success,  but  in  many  instances  the  trouble  is  so 
slight  that  it  is  tolerated  until  the  condition  passes  away  of  itself.  On 
the  other  hand,  however,  it  is  frequently  very  tiresome  and  painful ; 
and  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  it  does  not  as  a  rule  call  for 
special  treatment,  still,  on  account  of  the  discomfort  it  causes, 
advice  may  sometimes  be  sought  in  the  early  stages,  but  more  often 
only  when  the  acute  coryza  has  almost  developed  into  a  chronic  con- 
dition. There  can  be  no  doubt  that  in  certain  persons  there  is  some 
predisposition  to  attacks  of  acute  nasal  catarrh,  and  that  when  this 
predisposition  exists  the  immediate  exciting  cause  is  not  always  the 
same.  Acute  nasal  catarrh  may  result  from  local  irritation  of  an 
unduly  sensitive  portion  of  the  mucous  membrane.  Such  irritation 
may  perhaps  be  sometimes  due  to  solid  particles  of  inert  character ; 
but  there  is  strong  reason  for  believing  that  frequently  coryza 
spreads  sporadically,  and  that  the  attack  is  due  to  local  irritation 
produced  by  some  specific  organism.  This  contention  is  not  weak- 
ened by  the  fact  that  nasal  catarrh,  in  many  respects,  strongly  re- 
sembles attacks  of  so-called  hay  fever,  or  rose  fever,  where  the  sense 
of  irritation,  followed  by  severe  sneezing,  and  perhaps  by  running 
at  the  eyes  and  nose,  results  apparently  from  the  development  of 
pollen  grains  upon  a  moist  surface.  Nor  is  the  notion  of  irritation 
by  living  organisms  materially  affected  by  the  prevalence  of  attacks 
of  nasal  catarrh  at  special  times  of  the  year  and  with  special  direc- 
tions of  the  wind,  since,  although  in  windy  weather  inert  particles 
of  dust  may  cause  irritation,  it  is  then  equally  possible  for  organ- 
isms to  be  set  in  motion  and  to  produce  the  same  result. 


60  RESPIRATION. 

Irritation  may  sometimes  be  reflex  instead  of  direct,  and  it  is  a 
matter  of  common  experience  that  attacks  of  nasal  catarrh  may 
arise  after  the  temporary  exposure  of  some  unprotected  part  to  a 
draught.  Whether,  however,  the  immediate  exciting  cause  is  reflex 
or  direct,  the  predisposition  is  the  factor  which  is  to  be  recognized 
in  the  individual,  and,  once  recognized,  may  lead  to  prophylactic 
treatment  which  renders  attacks  less  frequent.  The  best  prophy- 
lactic treatment  is  that  calculated  to  increase  the  cutaneous  circula- 
tion and  to  restore  tone  to  the  vessels,  so  that  slight  exposures  shall 
be  less  prejudicial.  This  form  of  tonic  treatment  is  best  commenced 
during  the  summer  months,  and  it  consists  partly  in  encouraging 
the  individual  to  take  daily  exercise  in  comparatively  light  clothing, 
and  partly  also  in  encouraging  him  to  accustom  himself  to  the  use 
of  cold  baths  daily. 

Many  persons  prone  to  nasal  catarrh  dread  exposure  to  cold,  and 
complain  that  a  cold  shower  bath  or  sponge  bath  leaves  them  with 
their  extremities  cold  and  blue.  Although  doubtless  true  in  the 
majority  of  cases,  this  tendency  to  capillary  stasis  may  often  be 
overcome  with  a  little  patience  and  practice.  It  may  result  from 
the  bath  being  too  prolonged,  and  sometimes  it  may  ensue  from 
undue  exposure  after  the  bath.  The  cold  bath  should  be  followed 
by  friction  with  a  large  rough  towel,  by  means  of  which  the  cutane- 
ous circulation  is  greatly  stimulated  and  the  surface  rapidly  dried. 
Hardening  efforts  with  a  small  quantity  of  cold  water  and  with  a 
small  thin  towel  are  almost  doomed  to  failure.  When  there  is  some 
difficulty  in  commencing  the  use  of  a  cold  bath,  it  may  often  be 
overcome  by  advising  the  patient  to  stand  in  tepid  water  while 
sponging  the  body  with  cold  water.  The  use  of  the  shower  bath, 
when  it  can  be  arranged,  will  often  overcome  the  objection  to  cold 
bathing.  Broadly  speaking,  these  measures  will,  in  general,  be 
sufficient  to  reduce  the  troublesome  predisposition  to  nasal  catarrh. 
When,  however,  the  nasal  catarrh  takes  the  form  of  hay  fever,  or 
hay  asthma,  or  of  autumnal  catarrh,  it  is  often  necessary  to  change 
the  residence  of  the  patient  to  the  seaside,  or  even  to  advise  him  to 
take  a  sea  voyage. 

With  regard  to  medicinal  treatment,  with  the  onset  of  nasal 
catarrh  diaphoretic  measures  are  frequently  successful ;  warm 
drinks  at  bedtime,  a  Avarm  bath,  and  perhaps  extra  covering  may 
suffice  to  induce  perspiration.  Diaphoresis  may  also  be  encouraged 
by  the   use  of   small  doses  of   opium  or  of  morphine.     Dover's 


ACUTE  GORYZA,   OB  NASAL  CATARRH.  61 

powder  may  be  given  at  bedtime  ;  or,  if  the  patient  is  experiencing 
much  discomfort  during  the  afternoon,  the  acetate,  tartrate,  or 
hydrochlorate  of  morphine  may  be  given  during  the  evening  in 
doses  of  about  |  grain,  and  a  second  dose  of  the  same  amount  may 
be  given  at  bedtime.  When  employed  in  this  way,  diaphoresis  is 
more  likely  to  follow  than  when  the  drug  is  given  in  larger  quan- 
tity, and  given  after  food.  Although  it  is  unnecessary  to  keep  the 
patient  in  bed  for  nasal  catarrh,  the  duration  of  an  attack  may  often 
be  curtailed  by  remaining  in  one  room  for  twenty-four  or  forty- 
eight  hours.  During  this  time  diaphoresis  should  be  encouraged  by 
the  use  of  the  solution  of  ammonium  acetate,  which  may  be  given 
in  moderate  doses — a  drachm  or  two  drachms  three  or  four  times  a 
day — and  its  efficacy  may  be  increased  by  adding  some  ipecacuanha 
wine,  spirit  of  chloroform,  or  spirit  of  ether,  the  mixture  being  made 
up  with  camphor  water.  Some  patients  prefer  the  use  of  quinine 
throughout  the  treatment  of  acute  nasal  catarrh,  and  think  that 
attacks  have  often  been  aborted  by  this  remedy.  It  will  lower  the 
temperature,  and  it  may  increase  the  appetite  and  strength,  which 
are  often  reduced  in  these  cases.  It  is,  however,  a  drug  which 
must  be  used  with  some  moderation,  since,  if  given  in  overdoses,  it 
may  produce  headache  and  buzzing  in  the  ears.  If  prescribed  in 
doses  of  1  or  2  grains  three  times  a  day,  and,  moreover,  if  given  in 
an  effervescent  form,  quinine  is  frequently  beneficial,  particularly 
if  it  is  employed  after  the  nasal  catarrh  has  been  fully  established. 
It  then  seems  to  shorten  the  attack,  even  though  powerless  to  arrest 
it. 

Another  remedy,  which  is  perhaps  more  popular,  is  the  spirit  of 
camphor  ;  but  in  employing  this  drug  care  must  be  taken  not  to 
use  the  homceopathic  spirit  in  pharmacopoeial  doses,  many  cases 
having  been  recorded  where  serious  results  have  followed  this  error. 
This  caution  is  the  more  necessary,  since  this  preparation  is  com- 
monly used  without  medical  advice,  a  few  drops  upon  sugar  or 
mixed  with  water  being  taken  at  short  intervals  until  the  feeling  of 
discomfort  is  reduced. 

Another  remedy  which  is  in  popular  use  is  the  tincture  of  aconite, 
and  this  is  taken  in  much  the  same  manner — 1  or  2  minims  every 
two  hours  until  the  sense  of  feverishness  has  passed  away.  Here 
also  considerable  caution  is  required,  and  in  fact  it  should  not  be 
used  at  all  as  a  domestic  remedy.  If  employed  during  the  initial 
stages  it  may  give  relief  after  the  second  or  third  dose  ;  but  when 


62  RESPIRATION. 

nasal  catarrh  has  become  fully  established,  there  is  great  risk  in 
permitting  it  to  be  used  too  frequently. 

When  the  early  stages  i*of  nasal  catarrh  are  associated  with  much 
fever,  salicin  and  sodium  salicylate  often  serve  to  reduce  the  tem- 
perature and  to  relieve  the  aching  pains,  of  which  complaint  is  so 
com.monly  made.  At  the  beginning  of  an  ordinary  cold,  relief  is 
frequently  obtained  by  taking 

li. — Sodii  salicylatis        .         .         .         .         .         .         .  ,^ij. 

Spiritus  ammonise  aromatici     .....  ^j. 

Syrupi  aurantii         .         .         .         .         .       q.  s.  ad  ^ij. 
S. — One  teaspoonful  in  water  every  four  hours. 

Belladonna  has  been  recommended,  with  the  view  of  relieving 
the  sense  of  irritation  about  the  fauces  and  the  pain  during  swallow- 
ing. When  it  gives  beneficial  results,  it  probably  does  so  by 
diminishing  the  pharyngeal  irritation.  It  is,  however,  a  drug  which 
may  itself  cause  dryness  of  the  fauces  and  pain  in  swallowing,  and 
it  is  only  in  exceptional  cases  that  its  employment  is  of  any  par- 
ticular value.  Local  applications  have  frequently  been  employed, 
and  may  to  some  extent  reduce  discomfort.  Solution  of  cocaine  ap- 
plied directly  to  any  unduly  sensitive  spot  within  the  nasal  cavities 
will  sometimes  check  an  incipient  nasal  catarrh  ;  the  solution  may 
also  be  employed  in  the  form  of  a  spray,  to  deaden  the  sensibility 
and  to  reduce  the  fulness  of  the  vessels  in  the  nasal  mucous  mem- 
brane. This  remedy  demands  some  caution,  however,  as  it  may 
produce  great  cardiac  depression  if  used  too  frequently  or  in  too 
concentrated  a  form,  some  patients  being  peculiarly  susceptible  to 
its  action.  The  local  application  of  morphine,  together  with  some 
astringent,  will  often  allay  pain  and  reduce  secretion.  A  favorite 
form  of  snuff  has  been  recommended,  consisting  of  6  drachms  of 
bismuth  subnitrate,  2  drachms  of  powdered  gum  acacia,  and  2  grains 
of  morphine  hydrochlorate.  This  Avill  often  serve  to  reduce  the 
frequency  of  sneezing,  but  it  has  the  disadvantage  of  tending  to 
plug  the  nasal  chamber  if  used  too  freely.  Like  many  other  local 
applications,  it  is  of  little  service  except  in  the  early  acute  stage. 
During  the  first  two  or  three  days  of  a  coryza  H.  B.  Whitney 
recommends  a  snuff  the  principal  ingredients  of  which  are  cocaine 
and  menthol  : 

R. — Cocaine  hydrochlorate      ......  gr.  ijss. 

Menthol .         .         .  gr.  iv. 

Boric  acid        .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .  gss. 

Powdered  coffee gr.  viij. — M. 


CHRONIC  NASAL  CATARRH.  63 

Of  this  powder  a  small  pinch  is  directed  to  be  taken  in  each 
nostril  every  two  or  three  hours.  It  gives  great  temporary  relief. 
This  snuff  may  also  be  used  with  benefit  after  there  is  an  abundant 
catarrhal  secretion.  It  may  with  advantage  be  combined  with  the 
internal  use  of  gelsemium,  or  later  with  atropine. 

Alkaline  sprays  of  sodium  bicarbonate,  or  a  spray  of  sodium 
chloride,  will  sometimes  reduce  the  sense  of  obstruction  ;  and 
similar  benefit  is  frequently  experienced  from  various  inhalations, 
those  of  menthol  and  of  camphor  being  most  in  favor.  A  con- 
venient form  of  inhaler  has  been  introduced,  consisting  of  a  glass 
tube  lined  with  menthol,  and  with  an  oval  orifice  adapted  to  the 
shape  of  the  nostril. 

Inhalations  of  carbolic  acid  have  often  been  recommended,  and 
to  some  extent  they  appear  to  have  the  power  to  check  an  attack. 
Inhalations  of  ammonia,  of  compound  tincture  of  benzoin,  of  iodine, 
and  of  eucalyptus  have  also  frequently  been  employed. 

If  the  attack  becomes  unduly  protracted,  tonic  measures  are  in- 
dicated. The  use  of  quinine  has  already  been  mentioned  ;  arsenic 
may  also  be  given  as  a  tonic,  but  the  best  results  of  all  follow 
change  of  air,  preferably  a  short  stay  at  the  seaside.  {See  Influenza.) 

Chronic  Nasal  Catarrh.  Chronic  nasal  catarrh  is  to  be  treated 
partly  by  hygienic  and  constitutional  remedies  and  partly  by  local 
measures.  In  the  majority  of  cases,  improvement  results  from  the 
use  of  tonics,  of  which  preparations  of  iron  and  of  arsenic  are  per- 
haps most  serviceable.  Syrup  of  iodide  of  iron  will  often  prove 
beneficial,  more  particularly  in  cases  of  syphilitic  origin,  and  arsenical 
preparations  are  frequently  used  where  the  etiology  is  more  doubtful. 
Chronic  nasal  catarrh  sometimes  depends  upon  diseased  bone,  lead- 
ing to  the  retention  of  secretion,  which  assumes  an  offensive  char- 
acter, constituting  ozsena.  The  secretion  often  dries  upon  the  nasal 
mucous  membrane,  forming  hard  offensive  crusts,  and  treatment  is 
of  little  service  without  their  careful  removal.  This  may  be  effected 
by  the  application  of  the  galvano-cautery,  which,  at  a  moderate 
temperature,  adheres  to  the  crusts  and  permits  of  their  removal. 
This  treatment,  however,  must  be  frequently  repeated,  only  a 
small  portion  of  the  nasal  mucous  membrane  being  dealt  with  at  a 
time.  When  there  is  much  secretion,  astringent  injections  Avill  be 
beneficial,  and  lead  acetate  is  perhaps  most  commonly  used,  though 
the  tincture  of  hamamelis  has  been  recommended.  For  the  relief 
of  ozgena  numerous  local  applications  have  been  used.  The  majority 


64  RESPIRATION. 

depend  upon  cleanliness  by  the  injection  of  various  solutions  through 
the  nasal  chamber  ;  a  solution  of  common  salt  or  of  sodium  bicar- 
bonate may  be  thus  employed.  Numerous  other  local  applications 
have  been  recommended,  as,  for  example,  sodium  salicylate,  iodo- 
form, iodine,  zinc  chloride,  and  potassium  chlorate  ;  tar  water  with 
sodium  chloride  has  also  been  advocated.  When  there  is  much 
pain,  applications  of  cocaine  have  been  made  ;  and  after  the  sensi- 
tiveness of  the  mucous  membrane  has  been  thus  reduced,  powerful 
remedies  have  been  applied,  such  as  iodine  or  silver  nitrate.  Solu- 
tions of  mercuric  chloride  are  sometimes  very  beneficial,  both  in 
removing  fetor  and  in  preventing  further  secretion.  These  solu- 
tions are  best  applied  in  the  form  of  spray,  so  as  to  distribute  the 
action  more  perfectly.  The  inhalation  of  camphor,  or  the  insuffla- 
tion of  camphor  and  boric  acid,  will  sometimes  be  attended  with 
benefit.  When  the  condition  depends  upon  the  presence  of  diseased 
bone,  measures  for  its  removal  must  be  adopted ;  though,  since 
these  cases  are  frequently  of  syphilitic  origin,  the  usual  constitu- 
tional treatment  for  this  disease  should  be  employed  simultaneously. 

Hay  Fever.  Hay  fever  is  the  term  applied  to  a  condition 
marked  by  abnormal  sensitiveness  of  the  upper  air  passages,  which 
renders  the  patient  liable  to  distinct  asthmatic  attacks,  or  to  severe 
attacks  of  sneezing.  This  condition  has  also  been  termed  autumnal 
catarrh,  summer  catarrh,  or  rose  cold. 

Although  the  symptoms  of  hay  fever  are  primarily  those  charac- 
teristic of  the  onset  of  severe  nasal  catarrh,  the  severity  of  the  attack 
is  so  great,  and  the  interference  with  the  ordinary  work  of  life  so 
extreme,  that  every  effort  should  be  made  to  secure  relief  without 
waiting — as  is  so  often  done  with  nasal  catarrh — for  the  disease  to 
run  its  natural  course. 

Frequently  the  paroxysmal  sneezing  requires  the  existence  of 
three  factors  :  (1)  A  predisposing  neurasthenic  state  ;  (2)  an  external 
irritant ;  (3)  some  abnormality  of  the  nasal  passages.  The  predis- 
posing neurasthenic  state  is  inferred  from  the  class  mainly  attacked 
by  this  condition.  The  external  irritant  is  frequently  maintained 
to  be  various  kinds  of  pollen,  but,  although  pollen  is  the  most  com- 
mon exciting  cause,  any  form  of  dust  may  suffice  to  induce  hay  fever 
in  those  who  have  already  suffered  from  this  condition  ;  while  some 
unfortunate  individuals  are  similarly  affected  by  various  odors,  as, 
for  example,  those  connected  with  different  animals,  as  cats,  horses, 
or  dogs,  or  even  the  scent  of  various  flowers. 


HAY  FEVEB.  65 

The  third  condition,  the  existence  of  some  abnormality  in  the 
nasal  passages,  may  be  found  to  consist  either  of  areas  of  hyperses- 
thesia  or  of  the  development  of  bony  projections  from  the  turbinated 
bones  or  from  the  septum,  or  from  deviations  of  the  septum,  or  the 
existence  of  nasal  polypi. 

The  symptoms  ordinarily  commence  in  the  early  morning  with 
severe  irritation  in  the  nose,  the  throat,  and  the  eyes,  and  this  is 
accompanied  by  violent  sneezing  in  paroxysms  of  twenty,  thirty,  or 
forty  sneezes.  At  the  same  time  there  is  commonly  much  lachry- 
mation,  and  the  condition  is  frequently  associated  with  a  thin 
watery  secretion  from  the  nose.  This  may  persist  for  many  days 
or  weeks,  but  it  usually  gives  place  to  a  thicker  and  more  purulent 
discharge  toward  the  end  of  the  attack. 

The  treatment  of  hay  fever  may  be  divided  into  three  distinct 
groups  :  the  treatment  of  the  neurasthenic  condition,  the  avoidance 
of  the  sources  of  irritation,  and  the  correction  of  nasal  abnormalities. 
Very  little  relief  is  likely  to  attend  a  plan  of  treatment  that  does 
not  include  these  three  objects.  With  regard  to  the  first,  nervine 
tonics  are  usually  of  some  service,  and  with  this  object  arsenic  and 
strychnine  have  been  largely  used  internally.  Phosphorus  has  been 
sometimes  recommended,  but  we  know  so  little  pharmacologically  of 
the  action  of  phosphorus  that  the  benefits  to  be  derived  from  it  are 
somewhat  uncertain. 

Should  the  individual  be  of  an  anaemic  type,  preparations  of  iron 
may  be  given,  together  with  arsenic  or  phosphorus.  Occasionally 
also  quinine  may  be  used,  either  alone  or  in  conjunction  with  any 
of  the  foregoing  ;  and  when  the  nasal  catarrh  is  very  profuse,  bella- 
donna is  sometimes  of  service.  Potassium  iodide  is  often  adminis- 
tered for  hay  fever,  but  with  somewhat  doubtful  advantage.  Better 
results,  however,  are  generally  to  be  obtained  from  the  use  of  am- 
monium bromide  or  potassium  bromide. 

Secondly,  with  regard  to  the  avoidance  of  sources  of  irritation, 
this  may  sometimes  be  effected  by  residence  in  a  large  town  or  at 
the  seaside  daring  the  season  at  which  the  patient  is  most  likely  to 
suffer  from  these  attacks.  If,  however,  they  recur  in  spite  of 
change  of  residence,  it  may  be  desirable  to  recommend  a  long  sea 
voyage  5  or  if  this  is  difficult,  on  other  grounds,  some  advantage 
may  accrue  from  dry  mountain  air. 

It  is  generally  found  that  every  case  of  hay  fever  has  to  be  treated 
on  its  own  merits,  and  that  the  course  of  treatment  which  succeeds 

5 


66  RESPIRATION. 

in  one  case  will  often  fail  in  others.  The  local  treatment  must  de- 
pend largely  upon  the  form  of  abnormality  that  has  been  detected. 
Any  source  of  obstruction,  any  outgrowth  of  polypus  should  be  re- 
moved ;  and  when,  in  the  absence  of  obstruction,  the  nasal  mucous 
membrane  shows  some  spot  of  hypersesthesia,  the  sensitive  spot 
should  be  destroyed  by  the  galvano-cautery  after  the  application  of 
cocaine.  If  the  condition  persists  after  the  use  of  the  galvano- 
cautery,  other  local  forms  of  treatment  must  be  adopted  ;  thus,  for 
instance,  a  spray  of  quinine  may  be  employed.  This  is  most 
readily  applied  in  a  solution  of  one  part  of  quinine  sulphate  in  875 
parts  of  water,  dissolved  by  heat,  and  used  either  to  wash  out  the 
nose  by  gentle  irrigation,  or  drawn  up  into  the  nostril  by  mild  in- 
spiratory efforts.  It  may  perhaps  be  more  convenient  to  dissolve 
the  quinine  in  oleic  acid,  in  the  proportion  of  one  part  of  alkaloid  to 
three  of  the  acid,  thus  forming  an  oleate  which  may  be  either  directly 
applied,  or  perhaps  preferably  mixed  with  liquid  paraffin  and  used 
as  a  spray. 

Salicylic  acid  is  also  sometimes  used  in  the  form  of  a  fine  powder. 
Thisj  however,  will  frequently  excite  sneezing,  even  though  it  may 
later  tend  to  cure  the  condition.  A  spray  of  a  solution  of  carbolic 
acid  is  also  occasionally  employed,  with  the  object  of  destroying  the 
vitality  of  any  vegetable  cells  which  may  have  reached  the  nasal 
mucous  membrane. 

Sometimes  a  spray  of  cocaine  is  recommended  ;  but  although  this 
gives  temporary  relief,  its  effects  are  usually  so  transient  that  the 
application  must  be  frequently  repeated,  and  there  is  extreme 
danger  of  fo  inning  a  cocaine  habit,  or  even  of  giving  rise  to  immedi- 
ate toxic  symptoms  if  the  solution  is  abnormally  strong,  or  if  it  is 
applied  for  too  great  a  length  of  time.  So  far  as  hay  fever  is  con- 
cerned, cocaine  is  serviceable  in  facilitating  the  application  of 
caustics  or  of  the  galvano-cautery,  and  at  the  height  of  an  attack  it 
may  be  used  on  one  or  two  occasions  to  relieve  the  discomfort 
pending  the  use  of  other  remedies,  but  it  should  not  be  employed  as 
a  matter  of  routine. 

Different  inhalations  are  sometimes  used,  as,  for  example,  inhala- 
tions of  camphor,  of  menthol,  or  of  menthol  and  camphor,  or  of 
eucalyptus  oil,  and  occasionally  stramonium  fumes  give  considerable 
relief. 

Dr.  Watson  Williams,  in  Allbutt's  System  of  Medicine,  vol.  iv. 
p.  700,  says  that  he  has  found  the  most  gratifying  results  from 


EP  1ST  AX  IS.  67 

spraying  the  nasal  passages  cautiously  with  an  aqueous  solution  of 
"  iodic,  hydrarg."  (a  combination  of  the  iodides  of  mercury  and 
potassium,  of  the  strength  of  1  part  in  100).  He  recommends 
that  a  cocaine  spray  be  used  beforehand  ;  but  he  adds  that,  as  the 
cocaine  is  destroyed  by  the  mercurial  salt,  it  is  necessary  to  relieve 
the  pain  which  very  rapidly  ensues  by  hypodermatic  injections  of 
morphine.  This  solution  is  intensely  irritating  and  causes  much 
congestion  of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  nose,  but  in  three  hours 
the  pain  subsides  and  is  followed  by  simple  nasal  catarrh,  lasting 
two  or  three  days.  He  claims  for  this  mode  of  treatment  that  if 
used  at  the  commencement  of  the  hay  fever  season  it  affords  im- 
munity for  the  time  being,  though  it  may  require  to  be  repeated  the 
following  year. 

Some  patients  declare  that  they  obtain  relief  from  the  use  of 
smelling-salts,  either  those  which  simply  evolve  ammonia,  or  from 
a  smelling-bottle  containing  a  mixture  of  ammonia,  iodine,  and  car- 
bolic acid,  made  into  a  paste  with  wood  charcoal  and  compound 
tincture  of  benzoin. 

Epistaxis.  Epistaxis  may  be  a  trifling  condition,  or  it  may  lead 
to  great  weakness  and  call  for  energetic  measures  for  its  arrest. 
When  it  occurs  in  children  or  in  plethoric  persons,  the  loss  of  blood 
frequently  gives  relief,  and  beyond  the  application  of  cold  com- 
presses to  the  occiput  or  to  the  forehead,  no  treatment  is  commonly 
required.  When,  however,  the  bleeding  is  continuous  and  the  loss 
is  extreme,  more  energetic  measures  must  be  adopted.  In  the 
majority  of  cases  it  is  best  to  attempt  to  arrest  hemorrhage  by  the 
local  application  of  astringents,  such  as  turpentine,  tincture  of  ferric 
chloride,  or  the  liquid  solutions  of  tannin  or  of  alum.  These  may 
be  applied  either  upon  cotton-wool  or  upon  lint,  so  as  temporarily 
to  block  the  nasal  chamber  of  the  affected  side,  or  they  may  be  used 
in  the  form  of  a  nasal  douche  in  more  dilute  solutions.  The  local 
application  of  tannic  acid,  or  of  gallic  acid,  by  insufllation,  will 
sometimes  arrest  hemorrhage,  or  the  nasal  chamber  may  be  washed 
out  with  warm  water.  When  epistaxis  continues  even  after  these 
measures,  it  may  be  advisable  to  plug  the  nostril.  Generally  it  is 
sufficient  to  ping  the  anterior  nares,  though  in  severe  cases  plugging 
of  the  posterior  nares  in  addition  may  be  necessary.  Plugging  of 
the  posterior  nares  is  not,  however,  easy,  and  happily  this  measure 
is  but  rarely  called  for.  By  means  of  Bellocq's  canula,  a  liga- 
ture is  passed  through  the  nostril   and  one  end  is  brought   out 


68  RESPIRATION. 

through  the  mouth,  and  to  this  end  is  fastened  a  roll  of  lint  of  suffi- 
cient size  to  plug  the  posterior  nares.  Traction  on  the  other  end 
through  the  nostril  will  pull  the  plug  into  position,  and  the  end 
which  projects  from  the  ^nostril  may  then  be  fastened  to  another 
plug  for  the  anterior  nares.  Whitla  recommends  that  the  cavity  of 
the  nostril  should  be  dried  with  plugs  of  absorbent  wool,  and  that 
small  masses  of  puff-ball  should  be  well  inserted  until  the  nostril  is 
comfortably  distended.  This  measure  will  check  hemorrhage, 
though  there  is  the  possibility  of  recurrence  after  the  removal  of  the 
plug.  MacDonald  recommends  that  hemorrhage  should  be  arrested 
by  the  application  of  the  galvano-cautery,  or  by  plugging  the 
anterior  nares  only,  since  he  finds  that  the  site  of  hemorrhage  is 
mostly  near  the  anterior  portion  of  the  septum,  and  is,  therefore, 
within  easy  reach  of  this  procedure,  or  of  pressure  applied  by  a 
small  anterior  plug.  In  cases  of  hsemophilia  the  hemorrhage  may  be 
very  great,  and  although  local  measures  must  be  adopted,  it  is  often 
advisable  to  employ  astringents  internally,  preparations  of  iron  and 
of  ergot  being  most  commonly  used.  With  severe  epistaxis,  ergot 
may  be  injected  hypodermatically. 

Acute  Laryngitis,  Acute  laryngitis  may  arise  independently, 
or  it  may  be  part  of  a  general  catarrhal  process  which,  commencing 
perhaps  with  acute  nasal  catarrh,  passes  on  to  pharyngitis,  laryn- 
gitis, and  possibly  terminates  with  tracheitis ;  or,  again,  acute 
laryngitis  may  occur  in  connection  with  acute  tonsillitis.  The 
ordinary  symptoms  of  acute  laryngitis  are  liable  to  modifications, 
which  will  be  described  in  the  ensuing  pages.  These  various  forms 
of  laryngitis  have  received  special  names,  such  as  membranous, 
oedematous,  and  phlegmonous,  while  similar  modifications  are  to  be 
met  Avith  in  connection  with  chronic  laryngitis.  On  the  other  hand, 
acute  inflammation  of  the  larynx  may  be  associated  with  spasm, 
giving  rise  to  the  so-called  false  croup,  which,  together  with  true 
croup  (a  form  of  diphtheria),  will  be  considered  separately.  In 
connection  with  acute  affections  of  the  larynx  it  will  also  be  found 
necessary  to  describe  and  treat  special  symptoms,  which,  as  in  laryn- 
gismus stridulus,  may  be  the  expression  of  neuroses,  or,  as  with 
aphonia  and  hoarseness,  may  be  dependent  upon  diseased  processes 
affecting  the  larynx  in  an  indirect  way. 

The  treatment  of  acute  laryngitis,  when  uncomplicated,  does  not 
differ  very  greatly  from  that  of  acute  nasal  catarrh.  It  is  advisable 
to  begin  with  the  administration  of  opium  to  relieve  pain  and  to 


A  C  UTE  LAB  YNGITIS.  6 9 

reduce  the  frequency  of  cough,  these  symptoms  being  most  trouble- 
some in  the  initial  stages.  From  the  commencement  warm  appli- 
cations may  be  made  over  the  larynx  ;  warm  fomentations  or  warm 
poultices  appearing  sometimes  to  reduce  the  frequency  of  cough, 
while  even  a  warm,  moist  sponge  placed  over  the  larynx  will  often 
reduce  the  sense  of  soreness.  Should  pain  persist,  however,  in  spite 
of  these  measures,  relief  may  be  afforded  by  employing  a  spray  of 
cocaine.  This  remedy  must  be  used  sparingly  and  only  in  emer- 
gencies, since  its  influence  upon  the  circulation  cannot  be  disre- 
garded. It  has  the  advantage  not  only  of  relieving  pain,  but,  by 
the  contraction  of  the  vessels,  it  causes  temporary  diminution  of  the 
inflammatory  process. 

Another  spray  that  is  frequently  employed  is  that  of  ammonium 
chloride  ;  but  the  use  of  this  remedy  is  perhaps  more  conveniently 
effected  by  the  inhalation  of  the  fumes  of  ammonium  chloride  which 
result  from  the  combination  of  vapors  of  ammonia  and  of  hydro- 
chloric acid.  There  are  many  convenient  inhalers  for  the  use  of 
ammonium  chloride  ;  perhaps  the  most  suitable  is  that  devised  by 
Godfrey.  Ammonium  chloride,  whether  used  in  inhalation  or  as  a 
spray,  finds  its  greatest  sphere  of  utility  when  the  dry,  irritable  con- 
dition of  the  commencement  of  acute  laryngitis  has  been  succeeded 
by  the  stage  of  exudation.  During  the  acute  stage,  relief  is  often 
given  by  inhalations  of  steam,  or  of  steam  impregnated  with  conium 
juice,  or  with  compound  tincture  of  benzoin  or  other  aromatic 
volatile  substances. 

When  acute  laryngitis  resists  milder  remedies,  or  when  the  dis- 
tress is  very  great,  a  bronchitis  kettle  should  be  used,  so  as  to  warm 
and  moisten  the  air,  and  thus  to  allay  irritation.  The  pain  over 
the  larynx  and  trachea,  which  is  so  much  aggravated  by  coughing, 
may  to  some  extent  be  controlled  by  the  use  of  ice  compresses  or 
of  ice  bags  ;  but  cold  applications  are,  as  a  rule,  rather  difficult  to 
inforce,  since  there  is  a  wide-spread  belief  that  the  disease  takes  its 
origin  in  cold,  and  that  it  will,  therefore,  be  made  worse  by  further 
chill  of  the  surface.  A  saline  aperient  is  often  beneficial,  even 
though  the  action  of  the  bowels  has  previously  been  regular ;  this 
will  tend  to  lower  the  temperature  and  to  relieve  headache.  On 
the  second  day  of  acute  laryngitis  it  is  advisable  to  employ  rem- 
edies which  will  facilitate  the  removal  of  expectoration,  such  as 
ipecacuanha  or  tartar  emetic.  Both  of  these  may  be  employed  in 
ordinary  expectorant  dose,  and  sometimes  benefit  results  from  the 


70  RESPIRATION. 

addition  of  ammonium  carbonate,  or  of  ammonium  chloride  ;  while 
the  sensitive  character  of  the  larynx  may  be  further  alleviated  by 
continuing  the  administration  of  small  doses  of  opium  with  the  ex- 
pectorant mixture.  Camphorated  tincture  of  opium  is  especially 
valuable  for  this  purpose,  and  as  a  rule  it  is  readily  taken. 


R.— Tincturse  opii  camphoratse 
Aceti  scillse 
Mellis  despumati 
Eruulsui  ammoniaci 

K; .  — Tincturse  opii  camphoratse 
Spiritus  chloroformi 
Mucilaginis  acacise  . 
Aquae       .... 


.  3SS. 

.  gtt.  V. 

s.  ad  ^j. 

.  gss. 

.  mv. 

s.  ad  ,^j. 


The  sense  of  rawness  may  often  be  relieved  by  the  administration 
of  warm  drinks  ;  and  benefit  may  result  from  moderate  doses  of 
sodium  carbonate,  or  of  sodium  chloride,  in  a  solution  which  is  to 
be  sipped  frequently.  The  same  remedies  are  sometimes  given  in  a 
mixture  in  a  rather  larger  dose,  or  ammonium  chloride  may  be  sub- 
stituted for  them. 

When  acute  laryngitis  affects  children  the  prognosis  is  commonly 
more  grave,  and  the  younger  the  child  the  more  serious  is  the  con- 
dition likely  to  become.  In  addition  to  the  use  of  warm  drinks,  of 
warm  compresses,  of  the  steam  kettle,  and  of  hot  sponges,  further 
relief  may  be  afforded  by  withdrawing  a  small  quantity  of  blood  by 
placing  a  leech  over  the  upper  part  of  the  sternum.  Frequently, 
after  the  removal  of  a  very  moderate  amount  of  blood,  the  obvious 
signs  of  laryngeal  distress  are  much  diminished,  the  child  ceases 
fighting  for  breath,  and  its  respiration  becomes  less  noisy.  With 
children  it  is  often  advisable  to  employ  an  emetic  at  an  early  stage, 
as  this  not  only  renders  the  movements  of  the  diaphragm  more  free, 
but  also  tends  to  diminish  laryngeal  irritation,  by  removing  any 
secretion  which  may  be  irritating  the  cords  and  causing  spasm. 
There  is  very  little,  perhaps,  that  need  be  said  of  the  selection  of 
an  emetic  ;  ordinarily  these  cases  occur  so  suddenly,  and  the  need 
for  an  emetic  is  so  urgent,  that  the  emetic  which  is  nearest  to  hand 
is  the  one  most  likely  to  be  employed.  Vomiting  may  be  induced 
by  the  administration  of  mustard  and  warm  water,  and  after  this 
mixture  has  been  given  it  may  be  favored  by  irritation  of  the 
fauces  ;  or,  should  time  allow,  tartar  emetic  or  ipecacuanha  may  be 
given,  though  the  depressing  influence  of  the  former  must  not  be 


CHRONIC  LARYNGITIS.  71 

forgotten  ;  zinc  sulphate  or  copper  sulphate  may  also  be  used.  The 
administration  of  apomorphine  hypodermatically  is  not  to  be  recom- 
mended for  acute  laryngitis  in  children,  since  it  promotes  very  free 
secretion,  not  only  within  the  larynx,  but  also  within  the  trachea 
and  bronchi,  and  this  may  increase  the  need  of  coughing,  and  every 
cough  produces  pain. 

Should  the  breathing  remain  stridulous,  and  should  there  be  signs 
of  obstruction  to  the  entrance  of  air,  as  shown  by  recession  of  the 
chest  wall  in  inspiration,  some  further  measures  must  be  taken  to 
give  relief.  Small  pieces  of  ice  sucked  slowly  may  reduce  the 
inflammatory  swelling  about  the  larynx,  and  they  certainly  relieve 
pain  ;  but  if  the  child  is  fighting  for  breath  it  is  necessary  to  increase 
the  size  of  the  laryngeal  orifice  by  some  more  active  treatment. 
Formerly,  in  cases  of  so-called  oedema  of  the  glottis,  free  scarifica- 
tion of  the  mucous  membrane  or  of  the  epiglottis  was  recommended. 
If  this  failed  to  reduce  the  swelling,  and  thus  to  facilitate  the 
entrance  of  air,  it  was  held  necessary  to  perform  tracheotomy. 
Without  a  doubt  the  lives  of  many  children  have  been  saved  by 
early  resort  to  this  operation  ;  but  tracheotomy  is  in  itself  some- 
what difficult  to  perform  while  the  child  is  fighting  for  breath, 
owing  to  the  rapidity  of  movement  of  the  trachea,  and  happily  in 
these  days  it  is  frequently  replaced  by  the  operation  of  intubation, 
which  will  be  more  fully  described  in  connection  with  diphtheria. 
The  administration  of  Dover's  powder  is  sometimes  recommended? 
both  on  account  of  its  power  of  promoting  diaphoresis  and  on  ac- 
count of  its  sedative  action  upon  the  laryngeal  mucous  membrane. 
This  remedy,  however,  must  be  sparingly  employed,  and  my  own 
experience  is  strongly  against  its  indiscriminate  use  ;  for,  notwith- 
standing the  benefit  that  results  from  free  perspiration,  the  amount 
of  opium  may  constitute  a  source  of  danger  when  this  powder  is 
employed  for  young  children.  Since,  however,  the  comfort  of  the 
patient  is  usually  increased  by  free  action  of  the  skin,  I  prefer  em- 
ploying warm  baths  and  warm  alkaline  drinks,  and  following  these 
by  the  administration  of  solution  of  ammonium  acetate  whenever  it 
appears  desirable  to  promote  diaphoresis. 

Chronic  Laryngitis.  The  consideration  of  the  treatment  of 
some  special  symptoms  often  connected  with  acute  laryngitis  may 
be  more  conveniently  dealt  with  after  chronic  laryngitis,  since  some 
of  these  symptoms,  notably  the  alteration  in  the  character  of  the 
voice,  may  more  commonly  occur  in  connection  with  chronic  forms 


72  RESPIRATION. 

of  disease.  Chronic  laryngitis  may  arise  from  a  variety  of  causes, 
and  the  treatment  is  likely  to  be  unsatisfactory  or  even  useless  unless 
the  cause  in  the  individual  case  has  been  ascertained  and  treated. 
The  determination  of  the  cause  is  the  more  necessary,  as  chronic 
laryngitis  often  occurs  in  connection  with  constitutional  affections  ; 
thus,  for  example,  it  would  be  absurd  to  attempt  to  treat  chronic 
laryngitis  of  tubercular  or  syphilitic  origin  solely  by  means  of  local 
applications.  The  treatment  suitable  to  the  special  disease  must  be 
adopted  simultaneously.  Some  general  indications  may,  however, 
be  laid  down  which  will  be  applicable  to  every  case  ;  foremost 
among  these  is  the  necessity  of  resting  the  larynx — that  is,  of  dis- 
continuing any  occupation  which  necessitates  the  constant  employ- 
ment of  the  voice.  Chronic  laryngitis  is  peculiarly  prone  to  occur 
among  actors,  singers,  clergymen,  and  others  who  have  frequently 
to  make  an  excessive  tax  upon  their  vocal  cords.  But  chronic 
laryngitis  may  also  arise  from  other  occupations,  particularly  those 
which  entail  the  inhalation  of  much  dust.  MacDonald  describes  a 
form  of  Board  School  laryngitis,  in  which  the  condition  was  prob- 
ably aggravated  by  the  attempt  to  be  audible  above  the  hubbub  in 
the  school,  as  well  as  by  the  irritation  produced  by  the  continual  use 
of  a  black-board.  Ragpickers  and  bakers  who  work  in  an  atmos- 
phere impregnated  with  dust  frequently  suffer  from  chronic  laryngitis. 
In  all  such  cases  temporary  change  of  occupation  is  essential.  For 
those  in  better  circumstances  this  is  most  beneficially  carried  out  by 
recommending  some  health  resort,  where  the  temptation  to  vocalize 
is  diminished  to  a  minimum.  Many  patients  do  well  with  the 
avoidance  of  exposure  to  the  rapid  alterations  of  temperature  of 
this  country.  Many  also  appear  to  improve  with  a  warm  and  per- 
haps fairly  moist  climate,  such  as  may  be  found  in  many  of  the 
Swiss  valleys,  while  they  do  not  show  as  much  amelioration  when 
sent  to  high  mountain  air.  In  some  foreign  health  resorts — as,  for 
example,  Aix-les-Bains — the  patients  may  take  one  of  the  mineral 
waters,  which  will  counteract  the  constitutional  cause  of  the  chronic 
laryngitis.  At  Aix-les-Bains  the  eau  de  Challes  is  often  employed, 
and  here  the  brightness  of  the  surroundings  and  the  warmth  of 
the  climate  combine  to  facilitate  a  cure.  In  England,  at  suitable 
seasons,  patients  may  be  sent  either  to  Buxton  or  Bath,  to  Torquay 
or  Bournemouth,  the  two  latter  being  preferred  during  the  late 
autumn  and  wmter.  Much  may  be  done  to  help  these  patients  by 
careful  attention  to  their    general  hygienic  surroundings.      Fre- 


J 


Gim  ONIC  LAB  YNQITIS.  73 

quently  they  require  tonic  treatment  and  generous  dieting  ;  it  is 
also  often  desirable  that  they  should  not  take  malt  liquors  nor 
indulge  in  strong  forms  of  alcohol.  Further,  patients  with  chronic 
laryngitis  should  be  encouraged  to  give  up  smoking,  since,  although 
this  habit  may  occasionally  appear  to  soothe,  it  far  more  frequently 
causes  increased  irritation  and  cough. 

Local  treatment  may  be  applied  in  a  variety  of  ways  —that  is, 
medicaments  may  be  employed,  first,  by  the  laryngeal  brush  ;  sec  - 
ondly,  by  inhalations  ;  thirdly,  by  insufflation  ;  and,  fourthly,  by 
sprays. 

The  applications  which  are  usually  most  preferred  for  local  use 
commonly  consist  of  astringents.  Of  these  perhaps  the  most  man- 
ageable and  most  generally  employed  is  silver  nitrate.  The  strength 
of  the  solution  depends  upon  the  frequency  of  its  application  ;  a 
solution  consisting  of  16  grains  to  the  ounce  may  be  applied  once 
a  week  or  once  a  fortnight,  and  this  serves  to  diminish  the  local 
fulness  of  vessels  and  to  allay  the  sense  of  irritation.  Preference 
has  sometimes  been  expressed  for  the  employment  of  much  stronger 
solutions,  but  before  using  these  it  is  necessary  to  accustom  the 
larynx  to  the  moderate  irritation  which  results  from  the  use  of 
silver  nitrate  ;  thus,  before  using  a  strong  solution  the  larynx  may 
be  painted  for  a  week  or  more  with  a  solution  of  the  strength  of  10 
grains  to  the  ounce,  and  when  this  can  be  tolerated  without  material 
discomfort,  a  solution  of  14  to  16  grains  to  the  ounce  may  be  ap- 
plied once  a  week.  Some  practitioners  prefer  to  employ  solutions 
of  alum  or  of  tannin  (10  grains  to  the  ounce),  which  may  be  con- 
tinued daily  if  necessary.  Ferric  chloride  (20  grains  to  the  ounce) 
and  zinc  chloride  (also  20  grains  to  the  ounce)  are  sometimes  em- 
ployed when  other  remedies  have  failed  to  give  relief. 

It  will  be  observed  that  in  the  applications  of  local  astringents  it 
is  almost  essential  to  use  a  laryngeal  mirror,  and  to  apply  the  solu- 
tions as  nearly  as  possible  over  the  orifice  of  the  larynx ;  in  other 
words,  these  applications  should  be  made  by  the  medical  man.  It 
is  not  advisable  to  intrust  the  patient  with  one  of  these  solutions, 
since  it  is  almost  impossible  for  them  to  be  used  satisfactorily.  This 
objection  does  not  hold  with  regard  to  inhalations,  which  often  give 
considerable  relief,  even  though  they  may  not  do  much  toward 
curing  the  condition.  Nearly  every  form  of  volatile  oil  has  been 
essayed  in  the  treatment  of  chronic  laryngitis.  Those  which  per- 
haps give  the  greatest  satisfaction  are  the  oil  of  turpentine,  or  the 


74  RESPIRATION. 

use  of  pinol  with  camphor.  The  compound  tincture  of  benzoin  is 
frequently  used  and  appears  to  be  very  soothing,  although  some 
patients  object  strongly  to  the  unpleasant  after-taste,  which  seems 
to  result  from  the  presence  of  a  small  proportion  of  aloes. 

The  employment  of  powders  for  insufflation  again  requires  the 
intervention  of  the  medical  man,  although  miany  convenient  forms 
of  insufflators  have  now  been  devised.  Bismuth  subnitrate  is  fre- 
quently used  for  insufflation,  but  it  gives  far  better  results  when 
mixed  with  a  small  proportion  of  morphine  hydrochlorate.  Patients 
generally  feel  remarkably  better  after  using  these  insufflations,  but 
the  relief  is  merely  temporary  and  can  only  be  maintained  by  repeti- 
tion of  the  local  sedative.  Some  astringents,  as,  for  example,  alum 
or  tannic  acid,  are  occasionally  used  for  insufflation,  and  boric  acid 
has  also  been  thus  employed. 

With  regard  to  sprays,  they  present  a  convenient  form  of  ap- 
plying drugs  to  the  larynx  and  adjacent  parts,  but  it  is  obviously 
impossible  to  limit  their  action  to  the  larynx  or  to  prevent  some  of 
the  drug  reaching  the  stomach,  and  therefore  the  list  of  drugs  which 
can  be  used  in  this  way  is  considerably  curtailed.  When  well  diluted 
some  of  the  astringents  above  mentioned  may  be  used  thus,  while 
many  speak  highly  of  the  value  of  alkaline  solutions,  the  amount  of 
alkali  which  thus  reaches  the  stomach  being  so  small  that  it  is 
certain  to  do  no  harm. 

Tubercular  Laryngitis.  Tubercular  laryngitis  demands  some- 
what more  energetic  treatment,  since  it  is  necessary  to  adopt  meas- 
ures which  will  destroy  or  remove  the  local  deposits,  and  it  is 
further  necessary  to  employ  almost  continuously  remedies  to  relieve 
pain  and  cough,  and  to  facilitate  the  act  of  swallowing.  The  re- 
moval or  destruction  of  ulcerated  surfaces  may  be  effected  by  lactic 
acid,  commencing  with  a  solution  of  the  strength  of  30  per  cent., 
and  gradually  increasing  the  percentage  even  up  to  75  per  cent. 
This  solution  is  applied  by  brushing  the  affected  surfaces,  and 
before  its  employment  it  is  essential  to  anaesthetize  the  larynx  by 
cocaine. 

Dr.  R.  Botey,  of  Barcelona,  makes  use  of  the  following  mixture 
in  the  local  treatment : 

R. — Carbolic  acid.       ...  ...     gr.  xv  to  Ix. 

Lactic  acid  .......     gr.  xxx  to  ^iv. 

Neutral  glycerin 3  v. 

The  laryngeal  mucous  membrane  is  first  anaesthetized  with  a  10 


TUBERCULAR  LARYNGITIS.  75 

j)er  cent,  cocaine  solution,  after  which  the  above  mixture  is  applied 
to  the  affected  parts.  At  first  only  a  small  amount  of  carbolic  and 
lactic  acid  is  used,  the  proportion  being  gradually  increased  up  to 
the  maximum  indicated. 

When,  however,  a  case  of  tubercular  laryngitis  comes  under 
treatment  at  an  earlier  stage,  and  the  larynx  is  found  to  be  red  and 
inflamed,  the  treatment  must  somewhat  resemble  that  of  chronic 
laryngitis.  If  there  is  no  exudation  Oertel  has  recommended  the 
inhalation  of  cold,  dry  air,  with  the  view  of  reducing  the  inflam- 
matory condition.  More  often  the  catarrhal  condition  has  been 
reached  before  complaint  has  been  made  of  laryngeal  symptoms,  or 
at  all  events  before  the  affection  of  the  larynx  has  been  recognized  ; 
and  accordingly  it  is  necessary  to  cleanse  the  surface  from  the  secre- 
tion which  so  readily  accumulates  about  the  larynx,  as  the  secretion 
may  be  in  part  of  local  origin  or  in  part  derived  from  an  affection 
of  the  bronchi  or  deeper  parts  of  the  lung.  The  removal  of  this 
secretion  is  essential  before  any  local  curative  measures  can  be  em- 
ployed, and  it  can  generally  be  affected  by  means  of  alkaline  in- 
halations or  sprays,  solutions  of  sodium  bicarbonate  or  of  sodium 
chloride  or  of  Ems  water  being  often  used.  Sometimes  a  combina- 
tion of  these  with  carbolic  acid  gives  good  results  ;  thus  Burney 
Yeo  recommends  an  inhalation  of  the  following  : 

li .  — Sodii  carbonatis  .  .         .         .         .         .         .  gr.  x. 

Sodii  chloridi      .         .  .         .         .         .         .         .  gr.  v. 

Glyceriti  acidi  carbolic!  ......  .^j. 

Aquae  .         .         .  .         .         .         .      q.  s.  ad  ^j. 

After  the  cleansing  of  the  surface,  when  there  is  much  engorge- 
ment and  much  effusion,  astringents  may  be  used  either  by  inhala- 
tion or  by  local  application.  The  drugs  employed  for  this  purpose 
do  not,  however,  differ  from  those  already  recommended  for  the 
treatment  of  chronic  laryngitis.  When  there  is  much  ulceration  it 
is  the  more  necessary  to  remove  all  mucus,  since  its  constant  pres- 
ence on  the  inflamed  surface  not  only  greatly  increases  the  irritation, 
but  also  hinders  the  action  of  any  topical  remedies  which  may  be 
applied.  After  the  employment  of  alkaline  solvent  inhalations,  the 
surface  of  the  ulcer  may  be  treated  with  carbolic  acid  or  with  silver 
nitrate  :  the  former  may  be  employed  in  the  strength  of  from  2  to 
3  per  cent.  ;  the  strength  of  the  latter,  however,  will  depend  upon 
the  frequency  of  its  application. 

When  there  is  much  pain,  this  may  not  only  be  reduced  to  some 


76  RESPIRATION. 

extent,  but  the  frequency  of  the  cough  may  be  diminished  by  em- 
ploying inhalations  of  vapor  of  sodium  benzoate,  ammonium  benzo- 
ate,  or  of  balsam  of  Peru  or  tolu  ;  and  if  the  pain  persists  in  spite 
of  these  measures,  relief  may  be  obtained  by  the  use  of  insufflations 
of  morphine.  It  is  essential  in  cases  of  tubercular  laryngitis  ta 
remember  that  the  health  of  the  patient  is  liable  to  great  deterior- 
ation as  a  consequence  of  incessant  pain,  since  it  not  only  exhausts 
the  patient  by  disturbing  sleep  and  by  the  frequent  irritable  cough 
which  it  provokes,  but  it  may  also  tend  greatly  to  interfere  with  the 
amount  of  food  which  can  be  taken.  In  addition  to  morphine, 
iodoform  may  occasionally  be  used,  either  alone  or  preferably  in 
conjunction  with  morphine. 

For  the  relief  of  dysphagia  a  spray  of  cocaine  may  sometimes  be 
employed  shortly  before  the  administration  of  food ;  but  although 
this  undoubtedly  facilitates  the  act  of  swallowing,  it  may  also,  by 
the  local  anaesthesia  which  it  produces,  favor  the  entrance  of  small 
particles  of  food  into  the  larynx,  and  thus  the  irritation,  after  the 
effect  of  the  cocaine  has  passed  away,  will  perhaps  be  rendered 
worse.  This  is  an  argument  for  the  sparing  use  of  cocaine,  and 
indeed  the  full  local  anaesthetic  effect  of  this  drug  is  certainly  not 
to  be  desired.  Dilute  solutions  in  the  form  of  spray  will  generally 
suffice  to  slightly  deaden  sensibility  and  to  cause  local  contraction 
of  bloodvessels,  which,  by  thus  diminishing  inflammatory  thicken- 
ing, will  enable  food  to  be  swallowed  with  less  discomfort. 

The  application  of  dilute  solutions  of  silver  nitrate  (2  to  3  per 
cent.)  will  also  occasionally  attain  the  same  end  ;  while  Solis-Cohen 
recommends  a  teaspoonful  of  sweet  almond  oil  immediately  before 
taking  food,  and  considers  that  this  affords  a  protective  covering  to 
the  irritated  surfaces  and  diminishes  friction.  When  dysphagia  per- 
sists in  spite  of  this  form  of  treatment,  it  may  be  necessary  to  feed 
the  patients  by  means  of  a  soft  oesophageal  tube  ;  but  this  obviously 
need  only  be  resorted  to  in  extreme  cases,  when  feeding  by  solids  is 
impossible.  The  solution  of  menthol  in  olive  oil,  in  the  strength  of 
one  in  ten — or  even  in  stronger  form,  one  in  five — may  be  applied 
directly  to  the  irritable  surfaces,  or  may  be  given  dissolved  in  sweet 
almond  oil.  When  it  has  been  decided  to  use  lactic  acid  to  act 
directly  upon  the  ulcerated  surface,  the  strength,  as  already  indi- 
cated, will  vary  according  to  the  frequency  of  its  application.  Two 
per  cent,  solutions  may  be  applied  frequently,  and  it  is  generally 


HOARSENESS  AND  APHONIA.  77 

advisable  to  follow  the  use  of  lactic  acid  by  a  spray  of  corrosive 
mercuric  chloride. 

Syphilitic  Laryngitis.  The  treatment  of  syphilitic  laryngitis  to 
a  certain  extent  depends  upon  the  stage  at  which  the  laryngitis  oc- 
curs. When  it  appears  as  a  late  manifestation  of  secondary  syphilis, 
it  is  advisable  to  employ  mercury  somewhat  freely.  Inunctions 
with  mercurial  ointment  may  be  continued  until  constitutional  symp- 
toms from  its  absorption  are  developed.  When,  on  the  other  hand, 
it  occurs  in  the  course  of  tertiary  syphilis,  it  is  advisable  to  use 
potassium  iodide,  commencing  perhaps  with  10  to  15  grains  three 
times  a  day,  and  rapidly  increasing  the  dose  until  25  or  even  30 
grains  are  given  three  times  a  day.  It  will  often  be  found  that, 
during  the  administration  of  these  larger  doses,  symptoms  of  iodism 
are  less  marked.  Should  the  laryngitis  show  no  improvement  from 
the  use  of  iodide,  it  will  be  desirable  to  employ  mercurial  ointment 
together  with  iodide,  or,  if  this  method  of  administration  proves 
inconvenient,  the  solution  of  corrosive  mercuric  chloride  may  be 
given  internally.  Local  measures  must  be  adopted  in  addition  to 
this  constitutional  treatment,  and,  as  in  other  forms  of  laryngitis, 
astringents  and  anodynes  are  often  called  for,  though  perhaps  the 
use  of  anodynes  is  scarcely  so  imperative  as  in  cases  of  tubercular 
laryngitis. 

When  the  ulcerated  surface  shows  but  little  sign  of  improvement, 
recourse  may  be  had  to  caustics  ;  silver  nitrate  and  copper  sulphate 
give  the  best  results.  Insufflations  of  iodoform,  or  of  iodoform  with 
morphine,  may  be  employed  whenever  there  is  much  exudation  and 
irritation  ;  while,  as  in  tubercular  laryngitis,  insufflation  or  sj)ray  of 
cocaine  may  be  used  as  a  palliative  measure.  Occasionally  in  con- 
nection with  syphilitic  laryngitis  there  is  considerable  oedema  which 
interferes  with  swallowing.  Should  this  resist  the  action  of  astrin- 
gents, it  may  be  necessary  to  relieve  tension  by  free  scarification  of 
the  affected  parts.  Syphilitic  laryngitis  is  not  to  be  considered  cured 
when  the  inflammatory  stage  has  completely  subsided,  since  the 
ulcerative  process  is  often  followed  by  the  formation  of  cicatricial 
bands  and  adhesions  which  require  surgical  treatment,  or  by  warty 
growths  about  the  larynx,  which  must  be  removed,  as  they  are  apt 
to  lead  to  aphonia  or  to  troublesome  cough. 

Hoarseness  and  Aphonia.  These  symptoms  occur  in  the  course 
of  many  of  the  foregoing  conditions,  but,  as  they  are  met  with  in 
other  diseases,  and  as  they  frequently  form  the  chief  reason  of  the 


78  RESPIRATION. 

patient  seeking  advice,  it  is  perhaps  desirable  to  deal  with  them 
more  fully  in  a  separate  section.  Hoarseness  can  only  be  treated  by 
the  discovery  of  the  cause  of  the  symptom.  When  it  arises  in  con- 
nection with  acute  or  chronic  laryngitis,  more  particularly  when  the 
false  cords  are  involved  and  press  upon  and  limit  the  movements  of 
the  vocal  cords,  the  treatment  of  hoarseness  in  no  way  differs  from 
the  treatment  of  acute  and  chronic  laryngitis,  as  already  detailed. 
Rest  of  the  voice  is  essential,  and  relief  may  be  obtained  by  the 
employment  of  astringent  gargles,  or  by  the  use  of  various  sedative 
inhalations,  insufflations,  or  sprays. 

When  the  symptom  arises  in  connection  with  tumors  about  the 
larynx,  the  removal  of  the  tumor  commonly  suffices  to  restore  the 
clearness  of  the  voice.  In  every  case,  therefore,  of  hoarseness  the 
employment  of  the  laryngoscope  is  an  essential  before  any  treatment 
can  be  satisfactorily  commenced.  The  syphilitic  and  tubercular 
forms  of  laryngitis  are  constantly  associated  with  this  symptom,  and 
the  degree  to  which  the  voice  is  interfered  with  serves,  to  some 
extent,  as  an  indication  of  the  laryngeal  affection.  Although  in 
general  terms  this  is  true,  it  must  be  remembered,  however,  that  a 
very  considerable  amount  of  laryngeal  affection  of  syphilitic  or 
tubercular  origin  may  sometimes  occur  before  there  is  much  alter- 
ation in  the  voice.  In  diphtheria  the  symptom  is  one  which  is  re- 
garded with  anxiety,  inasmuch  as  alterations  in  the  voice  or  in  the 
character  of  the  cough  indicate  the  extension  of  the  diphtheritic 
membrane  to  the  larynx,  and  therefore  serve  as  danger  signals. 
Laryngeal  diphtheria,  as  will  be  seen  later,  demands  the  employ- 
ment of  antitoxin  ;  as  a  rule  it  is  a,lways  advisable  to  intubate  as 
early  as  possible,  or,  if  intubation  is  impracticable,  to  perform  early 
tracheotomy. 

A.  form  of  hoarseness  which  is  less  amenable  to  treatment  than 
any  of  the  foregoing,  with  the  exception,  perhaps,  of  syphilitic  and 
tubercular  forms,  occurs  in  connection  with  nerve  lesions  involving 
paralysis  of  some  of  the  laryngeal  muscles  ;  thus,  with  aneurisms 
pressing  upon  the  recurrent  laryngeal  nerve,  hoarseness  is  frequently 
experienced,  and,  in  spite  of  treatment  with  iodides,  and  of  local 
sedatives  which  are  usually  demanded  by  the  patient,  but  little  im- 
provement results.  Complete  aphonia  may  arise  under  similar  con- 
ditions, but  complete  loss  of  voice  is  far  more  commonly  seen  in 
connection  with  hysteria.  Aphonia  may,  however,  result  from 
severe  ulceration  of  the  cords  or  from  anchylosis  of  cartilages  which 


LAB  YNOISM US  STBID  UL  US.  7 9 

prevents  the  approximation  of  the  cords  ;  or,  again,  it  may  ensue 
from  paralysis  of  both  adductors  from  nerve  lesions,  as  in  rare  cases 
of  aneurism.  The  most  hopeful  cases  for  treatment  are  those  in 
which  complete  aphonia  develops  suddenly,  since  in  the  vast 
majority  this  is  an  indication  that  we  are  dealing  merely  Avith  a 
symptom  of  hysteria.  Under  these  circumstances  the  ordinary 
treatment  of  acute  or  chronic  laryngitis  is  practically  useless,  and 
when  once  the  diagnosis  has  been  made,  it  is  well  to  treat  the  case 
speedily  by  the  application  of  a  strong  induced  current.  A  weak 
induced  current  or  a  continuous  current,  employed  under  notions  of 
mistaken  humanity,  is  absolutely  useless.  The  success  of  treatment 
depends  largely  upon  the  sudden  shock  and  pain,  which  cause  the 
patient  to  cry  out  loudly.  One  pole  is  placed  over  the  larynx  in 
the  neck,  the  other  is  passed  into  the  larynx  from  within,  and  a 
single  shock  is  given,  proving  nearly  always  sufficient.  This 
method  is  preferable,  although  sometimes  the  application  of  the 
electricity  from  without  is  essayed,  the  poles  being  placed  on  either 
side  of  the  neck,  so  as  to  send  the  shock  of  a  strong  current  across 
the  larynx.  Should  the  aphonia  return  after  the  use  of  a  strong 
induced  current,  local  treatment  may  be  adopted  ;  for  instance, 
silver  nitrate  may  be  applied  directly  to  the  larynx,  or  atropine  or 
belladonna  may  be  used  both  locally  and  internally. 

Laryngismus  Stridulus.  Laryngismus  stridulus  is  an  affection 
of  childhood.  Although  the  main  symptom  of  this  disease  appears 
to  be  of  laryngeal  origin,  there  is  no  doubt  that  it  is  purely  a  spas- 
modic affection  in  which  the  laryngeal  spasm  is  a  reflex  act,  and 
that  so  soon  as  the  spasm  can  be  overcome,  or  so  soon  as  it  relaxes 
naturally,  the  child  is  to  all  intents  and  purposes  free  from  laryn- 
geal symptoms.  With  laryngismus  stridulus  the  attacks  of  spasm 
and  of  urgent  dyspnoea  occur  suddenly  during  the  night.  The  child 
wakes  with  fright  and  is  seen  to  be  struggling  for  breath,  and  the 
air  which  passes  into  the  chest  enters  with  indications  of  consider- 
able laryngeal  obstruction.  The  breathing  is  noisy  and  stridulous, 
and  the  face  is  expressive  of  anxiety.  This  condition  most  com- 
monly attacks  children  at  the  time  of  primary  dentition,  and  it 
most  frequently  occurs  in  connection  with  delayed  dentition  owing 
to  rickets.  It  has  been  described  in  connection  with  infantile  con- 
vulsions, but,  as  is  well  known,  these  also  are  frequently  dependent 
upon  rhachitic  changes,  or  at  least  upon  those  errors  of  diet  which 
form  the  foundation  of  rickets.     The  attacks  of  spasm  are  perhaps 


80  BESPIBATION. 

most  common  during  the  actual  passage  of  a  new  tooth  through  the 
gum,  and  often,  therefore,  the  gums  are  found  to  be  enlarged  and 
tender  at  the  time  of  laryngeal  spasm.  The  condition  always  ap- 
pears alarming,  inasmuch  as  considerable  cyanosis  may  occur  during 
the  arrested  respiration  ;  but  in  the  large  majority  of  cases,  after  a 
few  seconds  the  glottis  relaxes  sufficiently  to  enable  the  child  to 
resume  breathing. 

Although  laryngismus  stridulus,  being  reflex,  is  to  be  treated 
most  efficiently  by  the  removal  of  the  cause — that  is,  by  constitu- 
tional treatment  during  the  intervals  of  spasm — yet  the  attacks  are 
in  themselves  so  alarming  that  immediate  treatment  must  be  adopted 
during  the  spasm.  In  order  to  promote  relaxation  of  the  glottis 
and  to  facilitate  respiratory  movements  a  warm  bath  should  be 
used,  the  child  being  completely  immersed  as  quickly  as  possible  and 
kept  in  the  bath  until  the  breathing  becomes  more  easy.  Some- 
times an  attack  is  shortened  by  the  application  of  cold  over  the 
larynx  or  over  the  upper  part  of  the  thorax.  In  obstinate  cases  it 
may  be  beneficial  to  conjoin  these  methods,  and  to  apply  cold  over 
the  larynx  while  the  child  is  in  the  hot  bath.  In  severe  cases  it 
may  be  necessary  to  perform  artificial  respiration,  but  so  long  as 
the  laryngeal  spasm  continues  the  eiforts  to  draw  air  into  the  chest 
must  be  unavailing.  When  the  respiration  remains  stridulous,  some 
relief  may  be  afforded  by  the  careful  administration  of  chloroform,  or 
occasionally  the  respiratory  efforts  may  be  rendered  more  deep  from 
the  use  of  ammonium  carbonate,  or  even  of  ammonia  as  an  inhal- 
ation. The  latter,  however,  must  be  employed  with  care,  as,  if 
given  too  suddenly,  or  in  too  concentrated  a  form,  it  may  excite 
laryngeal  spasm  instead  of  only  causing  deeper  inspirations.  When 
stridor  continues  but  is  less  severe,  other  remedies  may  be  employed. 
An  emetic  will  sometimes  cause  relaxation,  at  the  same  time  that  it 
may  remove  additional  causes  for  reflex  spasm  ;  but  emetics  are 
scarcely  as  beneficial  in  this  condition  as  in  acute  laryngitis  or 
croupous  laryngitis,  or  even  in  capillary  bronchitis  or  bronchopneu- 
monia. 

Nitrites  are  sometimes  employed,  either  by  inhalation  or  inter- 
nally. Amyl  nitrite,  from  the  ease  of  its  administration,  is  the  one 
which  is  perhaps  most  commonly  used  ;  but  other  nitrites,  notably 
the  spirit  of  nitrous  ether,  have  been  recommended  internally.  He- 
flex  irritability  has  also  been  allayed  by  the  employment  of  one  or 
other  preparation  of  belladonna,  the  most  convenient  perhaps  being 


FALSE  OBOUP.  81 

the  tincture,  given  in  conjunction  with  spirit  of  chloroform  and  solu- 
tion of  ammonium  acetate,  so  as  to  form  a  draught  which  is  readily 
taken.  With  the  same  object,  morphine  has  been  used  ;  but  I  must 
confess  that,  as  these  cases  so  commonly  occur  in  weakly  children 
at  an  early  age,  I  have  felt  that  this  treatment  was  not  only  un- 
necessary but  even  dangerous.  The  same  reason,  to  a  less  extent, 
has  influenced  me  in  not  using  chloral  hydrate  in  the  treatment  of 
laryngismus  stridulus,  although  it  has  been  employed  in  small  doses 
as  a  means  of  procuring  sleep  and  allaying  reflex  excitability. 

During  the  time  that  I  had  charge  of  the  out-patients  at  the 
Evelina  Hospital,  I  saw  a  large  number  of  cases  of  laryngeal  spasm, 
and  the  majority  improved  greatly  with  the  administration  of  potas- 
sium bromide,  the  last  dose  being  given  shortly  before  putting  the 
child  to  bed  at  night,  while  the  simultaneous  employment  of  cod- 
liver  oil  improved  the  general  condition  and  counteracted  the 
rhachitic  tendency.  Treatment,  however,  by  drugs  during  the 
intervals  of  the  attacks  should  not  lead  us  to  dispense  with  an  in- 
quiry into  the  nature  of  the  food  ;  and  errors,  more  particularly  the 
excessive  employment  of  starchy  food  and  sometimes  even  of  meat, 
must  be  rectified  and  a  milk  diet  adopted,  with  perhaps  the  admin- 
istration of  beef  tea  or  of  light  custards,  according  to  the  age  of  the 
child.  I  regard  the  treatment  of  laryngismus  stridulus  by  drugs 
alone  as  being  doomed  to  failure.  The  use  of  cod-liver  oil  tends, 
however,  to  oppose  the  constipation  from  which  many  of  these  chil- 
dren suffer,  and  should  there  be  marked  indications  of  irritation  of 
the  gums  it  may  be  advisable  to  give  relief  by  lancing  the  gum 
deeply  over  the  advancing  tooth  ;  frequently,  however,  this  measure 
seems  to  be  of  very  little  service. 

False  Croup.  False  croup  is  an  unsatisfactory  term  which  has 
been  used  for  cases  of  acute  laryngitis  associated  with  spasm  of  the 
laryngeal  muscles  and  comparative  closure  of  the  glottis  ;  it  differs 
from  diphtheritic  croup  or  true  croup  in  the  absence  of  membrane, 
while  it  differs  from  simple  acute  laryngitis  in  the  frequency  of 
spasm,  and  also  in  the  great  improvement  that  may  occur  within  a 
few  hours  or  even  a  few  minutes. 

The  common  history  of  a  case  of  false  croup  is  that  the  child, 
having  gone  to  bed  apparently  well,  wakes  suddenly  with  hoarse 
cries,  and  its  respiration  is  then  found  to  be  noisy,  and  interrupted 
frequently  by  a  hoarse,  ringing  cough.  After  some  hours  of  stridor 
the  condition  gradually  passes  away,  and  the  child  falls  asleep  again 

6 


82  RESPIRATION. 

and  wakes  the  next  morning  apparently  well ;  but  the  occurrence  of 
one  attack  is  likely  to  be  followed  by  another,  or  by  several  on  suc- 
cessive nights.  The  treatment  to  be  adopted  at  the  time  of  the 
croupous  breathing  consists  in  the  administration  of  emeticS;  and 
as  the  condition  appears  very  urgent  the  emetic  which  is  most  ready 
to  hand  will  probably  be  the  one  selected.  Vomiting  may  be  in- 
duced by  the  administration  of  mustard  and  water,  or  of  salt  and 
water  ;  or  if  the  condition  defies  these  simple  measures,  it  may  be 
promoted  by  ipecacuanha  wine,  or  by  tartar  emetic,  although  zinc 
sulphate  or  copper  sulphate  is  sometimes  preferred.  The  hypo- 
dermatic injection  of  apomorphine  is  so  commonly  followed  by  pro- 
longed vomiting  and  by  depression,  that  it  is  an  unsuitable  remedy 
to  employ  in  this  condition.  The  child  generally  falls  asleep  shortly 
after  vomiting,  but  should  its  breathing  continue  to  be  distressed, 
some  relief  may  be  afforded  by  using  simple  expectorant  remedies. 
Ammonium  carbonate,  ipecacuanha  wine,  syrup  of  tolu,  with  per- 
haps some  liquid  extract  of  liquorice,  may  facilitate  expectoration, 
and  thus  promote  sleep.  Apart  from  the  immediate  treatment  of 
the  laryngeal  spasm,  the  case  is  to  be  treated  on  the  principles 
already  laid  down  in  connection  with  acute  laryngitis  occurring  in 
children. 

Diphtheritic  Croup.  Diphtheritic  croup  is  an  extremely  un- 
satisfactory term  which  has  been  used  for  cases  of  laryngeal  diph- 
theria, and  the  treatment  will  be  more  fully  detailed  in  connection 
with  diphtheria.  It  may  suffice  for  the  present  to  say  that  the 
essence  of  the  treatment  lies  in  the  employment  of  antitoxin  and  in 
the  performance  of  intubation,  if  respiration  is  sufficiently  interfered 
with.  Should  intubation  instruments  not  be  available,  the  question 
of  performing  tracheotomy  must  arise  ;  and  notwithstanding  the 
high  mortality  after  tracheotomy  for  diphtheria,  my  experience  is 
that  the  risks  of  a  fatal  termination  are  greatest  Avhen  the  operation 
has  been  unduly  delayed.  If  deferred  until  the  child  has  become 
cyanosed,  the  prospects  of  recovery  are  extremely  gloomy.  {See 
Diphtheria.) 


I 


CHAPTER    IV. 

EESPIEATION.— tb?i!!mMed 

Acute  Bronchitis — -Chronic   Bronchitis — Bronchorrhoea — Bronchiectasis — Asthma 
— Emphysema — Haemoptysis. 

Acute  Bronchitis.  The  treatment  of  acute  bronchitis  depends 
upon  the  age  of  the  patient,  upon  the  extent  of  the  bronchial  affec- 
tion, and  upon  the  time  that  has  elapsed  from  the  onset  of  the 
attack.  With  infants  and  old  people  the  disease  is  likely  to  assume 
a  severe  type.  In  the  former  the  severity  usually  arises  from  the 
affection  of  the  smaller  bronchi,  which  may  considerably  impede 
oxygenation  ;  in  the  latter  the  danger  is  more  commonly  due  to 
the  weakness  of  advancing  years  and  the  readiness  with  which  such 
patients  succumb  to  any  acute  malady.  Acute  bronchitis,  even  in 
adults,  may  either  be  a  trifling  ailment  or  it  may  prove  serious  when 
extending  along  the  course  of  the  smaller  bronchi.  Some  patients 
may  be  able  to  continue  their  ordinary  vocations  with  but  little 
disturbance  when  suffering  from  this  condition,  while  others  must 
stay  in  bed  almost  from  the  first.  It  will  be  convenient  to  describe 
the  treatment  of  both  mild  and  severe  types. 

Even  with  mild  cases,  patients  should  not  only  remain  in  bed 
from  the  onset  of  the  attack,  but  they  should  also  be  kept  in  an 
atmosphere  of  even  temperature  so  far  as  possible ;  a  temperature 
of  from  65°  to  70°  is  that  which  usually  is  most  tolerated.  The 
air  may  sometimes  be  moistened  by  the  employment  of  an  ordinary 
bronchitis  kettle,  but  this  should  be  placed  over  a  fire,  or  else  over 
a  lamp  placed  in  the  fireplace,  so  that  the  products  of  combustion 
readily  pass  away  from  the  room.  Although  there  is  distinct  ad- 
vantage in  thus  moistening  the  atmosphere,  there  is  no  need  to 
surround  the  patient  with  a  tent  which  shall  unduly  confine  the 
steam.  Sometimes  patients  experience  relief  if  some  volatile  sub- 
stance is  added  to  the  steam.  Compound  tincture  of  benzoin  is 
frequently  employed,  while  creosote  and  turpentine  are  occasionally 
used.  These  measures,  however,  are  not  necessities  in  ordinary 
cases. 


84  RESPIRATION. 

At  the  onset  of  an  attack  of  acute  bronchitis  it  is  frequently  desir- 
able to  favor  diaphoresis  and  to  reduce  temperature  by  employing 
hot  baths,  followed  by  copious  draughts  of  hot  barley  water,  hot 
milk,  or  any  other  hot  drink.  Should  the  feverish  condition  resist 
such  treatment,  it  may  be  advisable  to  administer  small  doses  of 
tincture  of  aconite  ;  doses  of  from  :j  to  J  minim  of  this  drug  may 
be  given  every  hour  until  the  temperature  falls.  When  there  is 
much  fever,  smaller  doses  more  frequently  administered  are  some- 
times preferable,  for  example,  ^  minim  every  half-hour.  Diapho- 
resis may  often  be  favored  by  small  doses  of  the  powder  of  ipecacu- 
anha and  opium,  and  the  liquor  ammonii  acetatis  in  full  doses  has 
often  given  good  results.  Quite  at  the  commencement  of  the  treat- 
ment simple  purgatives  are  generally  needed,  the  selection  of  the 
purgatives  being  controlled  by  the  age  and  general  condition  of  the 
patient.  Frequently  small  doses  of  aloes  may  be  given,  but  this 
drug  has  the  disadvantage  of  acting  somewhat  slowly  ;  and  calomel 
or  gray  powder,  followed  by  a  saline  purge,  will  often  prove  more 
satisfactory.  The  sense  of  weight,  and  oppression  on  the  chest  may 
be  relieved  by  the  use  of  light  poultices ;  but  these  should  be  of 
relatively  small  size,  and  are  best  applied  over  the  bases  of  the 
lungs,  instead  of  over  the  front  of  the  chest,  where,  particularly  in 
children,  the  weight  of  the  poultice  may  tend  to  impede  respira- 
tion. 

With  the  onset  of  acute  bronchitis  the  cough  is  often  painful  and 
ineffectual,  since  the  bronchial  mucous  membrane,  although  inflamed, 
is  comparatively  dry.  This  painful  cough  may  be  relieved  by  the 
use  of  general  sedatives  ;  small  doses  of  one  of  the  preparations  of 
opium  may  be  given  except  in  the  case  of  young  children,  who  are 
intolerant  of  opium  in  any  form.  Relief  may  also  be  obtained 
from  preparations  of  morphine  or  codeine  ;  but  all  these  sedatives 
should  be  employed  with  great  circumspection,  and  should  be  dis- 
continued so  soon  as  the  bronchial  mucus  increases  in  quantity  and 
looseness.  Antimony  and  potassium  tartrate  may  also  be  used  for 
the  same  purpose,  and  this  drug  has  the  further  advantage  of  in- 
creasing the  action  of  the  skin  simultaneously  with  its  effect  on  the 
bronchial  mucous  membrane.  The  same  result  may  sometimes  fol- 
low the  administration  of  from  5  to  10  grains  of  the  powder  of 
ipecacuanha  and  opium  ;  but  on  account  of  the  opium  which  this 
contains,  it  is  often  desirable,  in  treating  children,  to  employ  instead 
the  wine  of  ipecacuanha.     It  must  be  remembered,  however,  that 


ACUTE  BRONCHITIS.  85 

this  acts  mainly  as  an  expectorant,  withont  inducing  any  diaphoretic 
action.  In  the  treatment  of  acute  bronchitis  in  children  this  may 
be  given  together  with  syrup  of  tolu,  which,  from  its  mucilaginous 
character,  allays  a  good  deal  of  the  irritable  cough. 

As  the  expectoration  becomes  more  free,  it  is  desirable  to  use 
remedies  which  favor  its  removal  and  reduce  its  viscous  character. 
Such  remedies  include  preparations  of  ammonium,  more  particularly 
the  ammonium  carbonate,  which  is  administered  with  ipecacuanha 
wine,  with  syrup  of  tolu,  and  perhaps  with  small  quantities  of  spirit 
of  chloroform.  Other  alkaline  preparations  may  be  given,  such  as 
sodium  bicarbonate  or  sodium  chloride.  The  tincture  of  senega  and 
infusion  of  senega  may  also  be  administered  when  the  expectoration 
is  not  very  large  in  amount ;  but  it  is  advisable  to  use  these  reme- 
dies cautiously,  since  during  their  use  the  quantity  of  fluid  expector- 
ation may  be  very  greatly  increased,  and  in  old  people  such  increase 
may  cause  considerable  discomfort.  The  syrup  of  squill  is  a 
favorite  preparation  for  the  treatment  of  acute  bronchitis  in  chil- 
dren, but  its  acid  nature  must  be  remembered,  since  this  prohibits 
its  employment  when  alkaline  carbonates  are  being  given.  In 
mild  cases  it  is  rarely  necessary  to  employ  other  remedies  until  the 
patient  is  convalescing,  when  tonics  and  acids  may,  with  advantage, 
replace  alkaline  carbonates  and  expectorants. 

Next,  with  regard  to  cases  of  greater  severity  in  which  the  disease  is 
more  extensive,  it  affects  the  finer  bronchi,  and  is  probably  attended 
by  a  higher  degree  of  fever.  The  initial  treatment  must  be  similar 
to  that  previously  recommended  in  connection  with  mild  cases,  so 
far,  at  least,  as  concerns  the  importance  of  keeping  the  patient  in 
bed  in  a  room  of  even  temperature  and  of  promoting  the  action  of 
the  skin.  Pain  is  more  often  complained  of,  and  it  is  accordingly 
desirable  to  give  relief  by  the  application  either  of  poultices  or  of 
fomentations  which  may  be  sprinkled  with  laudanum  ;  instead  of 
laudanum,  other  remedies  which  will  promote  local  fulness  of  vessels 
may  be  sprinkled  over  the  fomentations  or  poultices,  such  as  tur- 
pentine or  oil  of  cajuput ;  and  both  of  these,  from  their  volatile 
nature,  may  also  be  absorbed  during  respiration,  and  thus  produce 
beneficial  effects.  In  very  severe  cases,  a  few  leeches  may  be  ap- 
plied over  the  upper  part  of  the  sternum  before  employing  the 
poultice.  The  abstraction  of  a  relatively  small  quantity  of  blood 
will  frequently  diminish  the  sense  of  weight  and  constriction.  In 
acute  bronchitis  it  is  rarely  necessary  to  bleed  more  extensively. 


86  RESPIRATION. 

although  this  procedure  is  often  advisable  in  the  treatment  of 
selected  cases  of  chronic  bronchitis.  As  in  mild  cases,  antimony 
and  potassium  tartrate  will  prove  serviceable  in  favoring  diaphoresis 
and  expectoration,  and  it  is  also  necessary  to  employ  saline  purga- 
tives at  the  commencement  of  the  attack.  The  dose  of  both  of 
these  classes  of  remedies  must  be  regulated  by  the  age  and  strength 
of  the  patient,  since,  when  the  smaller  bronchi  are  largely  involved, 
there  is  risk  in  using  depressant  remedies.  For  the  same  reason  it 
is  desirable  to  avoid  the  use  of  opium  either  as  a  diaphoretic  or  as 
a  sedative.  Cases  of  severe  acute  bronchitis  are  perhaps  more  com- 
mon in  children,  who  bear  opium  badly  ;  but  even  in  adults  opium 
tends  so  greatly  to  diminish  reflex  excitability  that  there  is  risk  of 
its  favoring  the  accumulation  of  fluid  within  the  bronchi.  Should 
the  patient  at  any  stage  be  troubled  with  sleeplessness,  it  is  better 
to  employ  moderate  doses  of  chloral  hydrate,  of  potassium  bromide, 
or  of  sulphonal,  since  these  scarcely  affect  the  reflex  excitability  of 
the  larynx. 

With  severe  bronchitis  much  difficulty  is  often  experienced  in 
the  removal  of  expectoration  after  deep  sleep,  since  the  mucus 
which  accumulates  during  sleep  tends  to  become  more  viscid  and 
tenacious.  On  this  account,  the  administration  of  hot  diffusible 
stimulants  on  waking  will  frequently  be  found  beneficial.  Even 
warm  weak  tea  will  often  materially  aid  in  the  efforts  to  clear  the 
air  passages.  In  the  early  stages  some  relief  may  be  experienced 
from  the  use  of  inhalations,  either  of  steam  by  itself,  or  of  steam 
impregnated  with  sodium  bicarbonate  or  with  ammonium  chloride. 
During  the  employment  of  these  inhalations  the  expectoration  will 
often  become  more  loose.  The  after-treatment,  when  the  expector- 
ation is  fairly  abundant  and  is  removed  with  comparative  freedom, 
calls  for  the  administration  of  expectorants,  and  those  most  com- 
monly employed  are  combinations  of  ammonium  carbonate,  senega, 
and  tolu,  in  the  usual  medicinal  doses.  Syrup  of  squill  can 
be  given  with  senega,  but  with  this  remedy  ammonium  chloride 
should  be  used  in  preference  to  the  carbonate.  When  the  cough  is 
very  frequent  and  troublesome,  small  quantities  of  camphorated 
tincture  of  opium,  which  contains  opium,  may  be  administered.  The 
amount  of  opium  contained  is  so  small  that  it  rarely  causes  any 
anxiety,  but  this  tincture  should  not  be  given  to  children,  nor  should 
it  be  employed  when  the  physical  signs  indicate  that  there  is  a 
great  quantity  of  fluid  within  the  air  passages. 


A  C  UTE  BR  ONGHITIS.  8  7 

The  following  prescriptions  containing  sodium  and  ammonium 
salicjdate,  as  suggested  in  the  Semaine  Medicale,  January  9,  1895, 
are  sometimes  of  great  service  : 

R .  — Sodii  salicylatis 3J. 

Ammonii  carbonatis        ......  3J. 

Tincturse  opii  camphoratse      .....  3J. 

Syrupi  aurantii       .  .  .  .  .  .  .  ,f  ss. 

Syrupi  tolutani       .         .         .         .         .         .         .  ,^ss. 

Aquae q.  s.  ad  ,f  iv. 

Ft.  mist.     S. — A  dessertspoonful  every  three  hours. 

H .  — Ammonii  salicylatis        .         .         .         .         .         .  gr.  xl. 

Ammonii  carbonatis        ......  gr.  xxiv. 

Ammoni  chloridi  .         .         .         .         .         .         •  §•"•  Ixxx. 

Extract!  cocse  fluidi         .         .         .         .         .         .  3  iv. 

Glycerin!        .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .  ^ss. 

Aquse q.  s.  ad  .^iv. 

Ft.  mist.     S. — A  tablespoonful  every  three  or  four  hours. 

In  most  hospital  pharmacopoeias  a  mixture  is  to  be  found  con- 
taining spirit  of  ether  and  aromatic  spirit  of  ammonia  ;  in  this 
mixture  ^-drachm  doses  of  each  are  commonly  given,  and  sometimes 
10  to  20  minims  of  spirit  of  chloroform  are  added.  This  com- 
pound is  used  more  particularly  in  cases  of  acute  bronchitis  accom- 
panied by  bronchial  spasm  or  by  weakness  of  the  circulation. 

When  cardiac  failure  threatens,  it  may  be  necessary  to  administer 
other  cardiac  remedies  in  addition  to  the  ether  and  ammonia,  such 
as  pharmacopoeial  doses  of  tincture  of  digitalis  or  tincture  of  stro- 
phanthus,  or  small  quantities  of  strychnine.  When  there  is  much 
cyanosis  the  inhalation  of  oxygen  is  often  beneficial,  but  it  appears 
to  act  mainly  as  a  palliative,  enabling  the  patient  to  overcome  tem- 
porary difficulties  by  removing  accumulations  of  fluid  in  the  air 
passages.  For  the  same  purpose  emetics  are  frequently  employed, 
since,  during  the  act  of  vomiting,  large  quantities  of  mucus  may  be 
removed  from  the  bronchi.  In  selecting  an  emetic,  the  age  and  the 
general  condition  of  the  patient  must  be  considered.  In  elderly 
weak  individuals  ammonium  carbonate  is  generally  preferred  ;  but 
for  ordinary  use  zinc  sulphate  is  commonly  sufficient.  Care  must 
be  taken  in  promoting  vomiting  after  the  administration  of  emetics, 
since,  if  reflex  excitability  is  impaired,  relatively  large  doses  may 
be  given  without  producing  this  effect.  Small  doses  of  apomorphine 
given  by  the  mouth  AAdll  often  facilitate  the  expulsion  of  mucus  ; 
larger  doses  given  by  subcutaneous  injections  are  sometimes  em- 


88  RESPIRATION. 

ployed  with  the  view  of  causing  vomiting.  This  drug,  however, 
is  often  attended  by  great  cardiac  depression,  and  therefore  its  range 
of  applicability  is  comparatively  limited.  Potassium  iodide  in 
relatively  large  doses  often  increases  the  fluid  character  of  the  ex- 
pectoration, and  thus  gives  relief  ;  but  this  remedy  is  perhaps  most 
useful  when  an  acute  attack  shows  signs  of  running  on  indefinitely. 
Under  the  same  conditions  preparations  of  cinchona  bark  or  of 
quinine  may  be  given,  and  their  tonic  astringent  effect  is  often  in- 
creased by  the  addition  of  aromatic  sulphuric  acid. 

It  is  not  uncommon  to  find  the  course  of  acute  bronchitis  inter- 
rupted by  attacks  of  spasmodic  dyspnoea,  and  in  such  attacks,  which 
probably  depend  upon  bronchial  spasm,  relief  as  a  rule  may  be 
afforded  by  the  use  of  ether  and  ammonium  carbonate.  Occasionally 
the  spasmodic  difficulty  of  breathing  is  so  severe  as  to  call  for  the 
administration  of  chloroform,  which  relaxes  the  bronchial  spasm  ; 
in  fact  these  cases  may  be  treated  like  those  of  spasmodic  asthma 
{vide  Spasmodic  Asthma),  with  various  inhalations  or  with  prepar- 
ations of  stramonium  or  lobelia.  The  spasmodic  dyspnoea  is  perhaps 
most  prone  to  arise  when  the  bronchi  are  relatively  dry,  and  when, 
therefore,  there  is  but  little  objection  to  the  use  of  morphine  hypo- 
dermatically. 

Although  acute  bronchitis  of  severe  type  is  ordinarily  marked  by 
high  temperature,  the  fever  is  rarely  of  long  duration,  and  it  is,  there- 
fore, unnecessary  to  administer  antipyretics,  especially  as  the  fever 
ordinarily  declines  so  soon  as  active  diaphoresis  is  established. 

The  diet  of  acute  bronchitis,  whether  of  mild  or  of  severe  type, 
must  be  as  light  and  nutritious  as  possible.  Liquid  forms  of  diet, 
such  as  milk,  beef  tea,  chicken  broth,  and  the  like,  are  commonly 
preferred,  the  temperature  contraindicating  a  more  full  diet.  When 
the  fever  has  abated  a  more  generous  diet  may  be  given,  com- 
mencing with  fish  and  chicken,  and  gradually  resuming  the  usual 
diet.  Stimulants  are  only  called  for  when  there  are.  signs  of  cardiac 
failure  ;  under  ordinary  circumstances,  unless  with  the  view  of  pro- 
moting diaphoresis,  there  is  no  need  for  their  administration. 

Chronic  Bronchitis.  In  the  treatment  of  chronic  bronchitis, 
when  there  is  but  little  fever,  and  when  there  is  only  a  history  of 
winter  cough  recurring  year  by  year,  hygienic  measures  should  be 
adopted  to  check  the  disease  or  to  diminish  its  tendency  to  advance. 
Of  such  measures,  change  of  air  and  change  of  occupation  are  prob- 
ably those  most  likely  to  be  beneficial,  though  when  such  radical 


CHRONIC  BRONCHITIS.  89 

changes  cannot,  from  the  circumstances  of  the  patient,  be  effected, 
much  may  be  done  by  suitable  clothing  which  shall  render  the 
patient  less  sensitive  to  sudden  alterations  of  temperature,  and 
during  the  summer  months  much  may  also  be  done  in  the  way  of 
hardening  the  patient,  by  the  use  of  cold  baths  and  open-air  exer- 
cise, so  that  his  respiratory  organs  and  his  cutaneous  system  are 
affected  less  readily  by  cold  air  or  damp.  This  hardening  process 
is  of  considerable  importance,  since  patients  prone  to  chronic  bron- 
chitis are  in  the  habit  of  clothing  themselves  too  warmly  all  through 
the  year,  and  by  thus  promoting  diaphoresis  they  increase  the  risks 
of  exposure. 

The  judicious  employment  of  laxatives  or  purgatives  will  also  be 
found  to  diminish  the  tendency  to  chronic  bronchitis,  and  even 
during  an  attack  it  is  always  necessary  to  administer  saline  purga- 
tives from  time  to  time.  When  the  winter  cough  has  commenced 
it  will  be  advisable  to  check  its  violence  and  to  increase  the  facility 
of  expectoration  by  the  administration  of  alkaline  draughts.  Large 
doses  of  sodium  bicarbonate  can  be  taken  with  advantage,  and  the 
results  of  its  use  are  sometimes  very  striking.  Lauder  Brunton  recom- 
mends that  half  a  teaspoonf  ul  or  a  teaspoonf  ul  of  sodium  bicarbonate 
should  be  put  into  a  tumbler  of  water,  and  the  patient  should  be 
directed  to  sip  this  until  the  whole  is  gone,  or  until  the  cough  stops. 
These  alkaline  draughts  will  frequently  relieve  the  severity  of  the 
morning  cough.  Alkaline  mineral  waters  may  be  administered  in 
this  way,  or  they  may  be  given  with  a  draught  of  warm  milk  on 
first  rising.  In  chronic  bronchitis  it  is  often  found  that  the  greatest 
difficulty  is  experienced  with  the  morning  expectoration,  while  as 
the  day  goes  on  the  expectoration  becomes  more  loose  and  more 
fluid.  Benefit  often  follows  the  use  of  fairly  large  doses  of  potas- 
sium iodide,  a  drug  which  is  perhaps  of  greatest  service  in  cases 
associated  with  a  gouty  tendency. 

When  expectoration  is  difficult,  remedies  similar  to  those  used 
in  acute  bronchitis  may  be  given,  such  as  ammonium  carbon- 
ate, senega,  ether,  and  spirit  of  chloroform.  Ammonium  chloride 
also  is  often  of  considerable  service.  Frequently,  however,  recourse 
must  be  had  to  balsamic  remedies,  such  as  benzoin,  storax,  tolu, 
Peru,  or  ammoniacum.  The  compound  tincture  of  benzoin  is  fre- 
quently employed,  either  internally  or  as  an  inhalation,  while  the 
balsams  of  Peru  and  of  tolu  may  be  given  in  capsules  or  as  an 
emulsion. 


90  RESPIRATION. 

Respirators  are  of  service  in  many  cases  of  chronic  bronchitis, 
and  they  form  a  convenient  method  of  employing  such  remedies  as 
pinol,  phenol,  or  terebene.  The  respirator  used  should  be  one  which 
covers  the  nose  as  well  as  the  mouth,  so  that  the  patient  is  obliged 
to  inhale  air  which  passes  through  the  sponge  upon  which  the 
volatile  medicament  is  dropped.  A  very  simple  and  inexpensive 
form  of  respirator  has  been  advised  by  my  colleague,  Dr.  Burney 
Yeo,  and  consists  of  light  plates  of  perforated  zinc,  which  inclose 
a  sponge.  In  these  cases,  as  in  acute  bronchitis,  advantage  often 
results  from  the  use  of  inhalations,  and  to  those  already  mentioned 
menthol  aud  creosote  may  be  added.  Many  observers  are  in  favor 
of  the  employment  of  tar  vapor  and  maintain  that  its  use  will  cur- 
tail the  duration  and  lessen  the  severity  of  catarrhal  attacks.  Tar 
is  also  administered  internally  in  pills  containing  two  grains  of  the 
pix  liquida  of  the  United  States  mid  British  Pharmacopceias.  Tere- 
bene in  5  to  15-minim  doses  has  been  strongly  recommended  in  the 
treatment  of  this  complaint ;  creosote  also  has  given  good  results 
whether  administered  in  capsules  or  in  a  mixture  with  mucilage. 

Bronchorrhcea. — Although  in  chronic  bronchitis  the  greatest 
difficulty  results  from  scantiness  and  tenacity  of  expectoration,  in- 
dicating therefore  the  use  of  expectorants,  cases  are  frequently  met 
with  in  which  the  mucus  is  extremely  abundant.  To  this  condition 
the  term  bronchorrhcea  has  been  applied.  This  abundance  of 
expectoration  often  gives  trouble  and  calls  for  the  employment  of 
remedies  like  senega  or  quillaia,  which  will  assist  in  the  expulsion 
by  increasing  the  fluid  character.  Both  of  these  remedies  must  be 
used  with  discretion,  since,  although  they  may  relieve  the  more 
urgent  symptoms,  they  may  occasionally  cause  the  cough  to  be  more 
protracted.  If  the  expectoration  is  extremely  abundant,  relief  may 
sometimes  be  afforded  by  the  use  of  emetics  ;  zinc  sulphate  and 
ammonium  carbonate  being  the  best,  though  ipecacuanha  wine  is 
often  employed.  An  emetic  is  indicated  when  there  is  much  cyan- 
osis, more  particularly  when  the  pulse  shows  signs  of  failure.  The 
removal  of  quantities  of  fluid  from  the  air  passages  is  often  fol- 
lowed by  increased  force  of  cardiac  contractions  and  by  increased 
facility  of  breathing.  Ammonium  chloride  is  another  remedy  which 
gives  good  results  in  the  treatment  of  bronchorrhcea,  and  it  may  be 
added  to  mixtures  of  senega  or  quillaia.  In  severe  cases  when  the 
patient  is  confined  to  bed,  benefit  will  also  be  obtained  from  the 
application  of  counter-irritants  over  the  upper  part  of  the  thorax. 


BRONCHIECTASIS.  91 

Fomentations  or  ponltices,  with  turpentine  or  cajuput,  will  fre- 
quently increase  the  comfort.  When  these  are  used,  there  can  be 
no  doubt  that  the  benefit  obtained  results  in  part  from  the  continu- 
ous inhalation  of  these  remedies  as  well  as  from  the  purely  local 
effect. 

In  addition  to  the  use  of  ipecacuanha  wine  as  an  emetic  it  is  also 
valuable  when  employed  as  a  spray  or  when  given  internally.  When 
used  as  a  spray,  in  all  probability  benefit  follows  the  absorption  of 
ipecacuanha  by  the  stomach,  since  probably  only  a  small  proportion 
reaches  the  air  passages.  There  is  little  doubt,  however,  that  some 
local  effect  ensues  from  this  mode  of  employing  ipecacuanha  wine. 

Bronchiectasis.  When  the  bronchi  have  become  dilated  in  con- 
sequence of  prolonged  attacks  of  chronic  bronchitis,  it  is  not  uncom- 
mon for  the  expectoration  to  become  offensive.  This  forms  an 
additional  source  of  weakness,  since  the  well-being  of  the  patient  is 
liable  to  be  greatly  affected.  For  the  correction  of  this  form  of 
putrid  bronchitis  it  is  necessary  to  employ  various  inhalations  in 
addition  to  the  ordinary  measures  adopted  for  the  treatment  of 
chronic  bronchitis.  Inhalations  of  chlorine  or  iodine  are  sometimes 
very  beneficial,  but  they  frequently  cause  much  discomfort,  owing 
to  the  irritation  and  cough  which  they  are  liable  to  cause.  Inhala- 
tions of  carbolic  acid  are  preferable,  but  the  drugs  Avhich  receive 
the  greatest  favor  for  use  as  inhalations  in  putrid  bronchitis  are 
creosote,  turpentine,  and  tar.  Relief  is  often  experienced  from  the 
employment  in  the  form  of  spray  of  dilute  solutions  of  carbolic  acid 
(2  to  4  per  cent.).  Eucalyptus  oil  and  pinol  will  also  tend  to  cor- 
rect the  fetor,  and  tincture  of  eucalyptus  may  be  administered  in- 
ternally with  benefit.  Other  remedies  which  have  recently  been 
used  are  santal  oil  and  myrtol,  the  latter  being  perhaps  best  admin- 
istered in  capsules  containing  two  minims  of  the  oil. 

Many  cases  of  chronic  bronchitis  appear  to  have  their  origin  in 
a  gouty  diathesis,  and  thus  may  be  treated  with  the  ordinary  reme- 
dies used  for  gout,  and  improvement  is  frequently  considerable 
during  the  use  of  alkaline  mineral  waters.  These  cases  especially 
do  well  if  the  circumstances  of  the  patient  permit  of  residence  in 
Southern  California,  or  along  the  lower  planes  of  Arizona  or  New 
Mexico,  during  the  winter  months,  or  of  occasional  visits  to  foreign 
spas  adapted  to  the  treatment  of  gout.  With  the  more  common 
cases  of  chronic  bronchitis  benefit  results  from  residence  during  the 
winter  months  in  one  or  other  of  the  Southern  health  resorts,  as,  for 


92  RESPIRATION. 

example,  Aslieville  or  Thomasville  in  this  country,  or  Bournemouth, 
Ventnor,  and  Torquay  in  England,  where  the  daily  variations  of 
heat  and  cold  are  less  marked  than  in  other  parts  of  the  country, 
and  where,  also,  from  their  sheltered  position,  there  is  less  exposure 
to  strong  winds  or  to  great  changes  in  the  temperature  at  night- 
fall. Patients  with  chronic  bronchitis  should  be  encouraged  to  take 
exercise  in  the  open  air  on  fine  days,  and  they  frequently  derive 
benefit  from  the  ''open-air  treatment"  which  has  of  late  years 
been  recommended  in  cases  of  phthisis.  When  the  means  permit 
of  foreign  residence  patients  may  be  sent  to  the  south  of  France,  to 
the  Riviera,  to  Madeira,  to  Algiers,  or  even  to  Egypt ;  but  if  sent 
up  the  Nile  they  should  be  warned  against  the  risks  attendant  on 
the  great  fall  of  temperature  after  sunset,  and  the  prevalence  of 
dust  if  they  make  expeditions  on  land. 

Bronchial  Asthma.  Bronchial  asthma,  or  spasmodic  asthma, 
is  generally  ascribed  to  spasmodic  contraction  of  the  muscles  sur- 
rounding the  smaller  bronchi.  This  contraction  occasionally  occurs 
alone,  but  frequently  it  is  accompanied,  or  followed,  by  inflam- 
matory changes  within  the  bronchi.  The  sudden  supervention  of 
bronchial  inflammatory  changes  has  been  regarded  as  the  first 
element  in  this  disease,  but  in  comparatively  frequent  cases  bron- 
chial asthma  passes  off  so  rapidly  that  it  is  impossible  to  assume  the 
constant  existence  of  inflammatory  changes.  Although  the  spas- 
modic contraction  of  the  smaller  bronchi  and  inflammatory  changes 
within  the  bronchi  are  the  two  theories  of  causation  which  are  prac- 
tically held  by  most  clinical  observers,  there  is  yet  a  third  theory 
according  to  which  the  affection  depends  primarily  upon  spasmodic 
contraction  of  the  diaphragm  and  other  muscles  of  ordinary  respir- 
ation, this  contraction  leading  to  the  characteristic  alteration  in  the 
shape  of  the  thorax  during  an  attack  of  spasmodic  asthma,  and 
necessitating  the  employment  of  much  muscular  force  to  cause  any 
expiratory  alteration  in  the  shape  of  the  thorax.  It  is  well  known 
that,  during  an  attack  of  asthma,  the  chief  change  consists  of  pro- 
longation of  the  expiratory  efforts,  the  inspiration  being  somewhat 
short  and  shallow,  while  the  expiration  is  prolonged  and  noisy,  and 
effected  with  difficulty. 

The  attack  of  bronchial  asthma,  or  of  spasmodic  asthma,  occurs 
so  suddenly  that  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  its  depending  upon  some 
neurosis.  The  chief  difficulty  in  the  treatment  lies  in  discovering 
the  cause  of  this  neurosis.     The  immediate  exciting  cause  may  be 


BRONCHIAL  ASTHMA.  93 

connected  with  the  character  of  the  au'  inspired,  or  it  may  be  de- 
pendent upon  some  alteration  in  the  course  of  the  air  passages, 
which  may  be  sufficient  either  to  start  reflex  irritation  and  thus 
directly  to  produce  an  attack,  or  to  obstruct  the  passages  to  such  an 
extent  that  the  respiration  must  be  largely  effected  through  the 
mouth,  when  consequently  the  inspired  air  reaches  the  bronchi 
without  being  moistened  and  warmed,  and  without  the  removal  of 
irritating  particles  of  dust.  It  is  always  well,  therefore,  to  examine 
closely,  at  the  commencement  of  treatment,  for  any  abnormality  in 
the  nasal  passages,  since  the  correction  of  slight  deviations,  the  re- 
moval of  polypi,  or  the  destruction  of  any  unduly  sensitive  spot  on 
the  nasal  mucous  membrane  by  means  of  the  galvano-cautery,  will 
occasionally  suffice  to  cure  the  asthma,  or  at  least  to  reduce  the 
severity  of  subsequent  attacks. 

It  must  not,  however,  be  assumed  that  all  cases  of  asthma  will  be 
improved  by  nasal  operations,  since  slight  abnormalities  may  play 
a  very  secondary  part  as  compared  with  the  influence  of  hereditary 
or  acquired  excitability  of  the  nerve  centres. 

Another  frequent  cause  of  bronchial  asthma  may  sometimes  be 
found  in  disturbances  of  digestion,  and  careful  inquiry  must  there- 
fore be  made  in  this  direction.  The  removal  of  constipation,  the 
correction  of  errors  of  diet,  such  as  the  avoidance  of  late  suppers 
and  of  various  indigestible  articles,  may  serve  to  effect  a  cure ;  but, 
even  when  undoubtedly  resulting  from  digestive  abnormality,  bron- 
chial asthma  is  peculiarly  capricious,  since,  under  special  conditions 
which  cannot  be  accurately  defined,  chronic  asthmatics  sometimes 
find  that  they  may  indulge  in  late  suppers  and  indigestible  articles 
with  impunity.  Those  who  have  previously  suffered  from  bronchial 
attacks  will  often  find  that  they  may  be  excited  by  emotional  dis- 
turbances. These  attacks  may  ensue  during  the  night,  after  im- 
moderate laughter,  or  after  a  fit  of  passion. 

Although  the  immediate  symptoms  of  asthma  do  not  differ  very 
materially,  being  marked  by  a  sudden  attack  of  urgent  dyspnoea 
with  intense  anxiety  and  distress,  which  sometimes  gradually  sub- 
sides after  some  hours,  either  leaving  the  patient  well,  though  ex- 
hausted, or  else  with  some  bronchitis  which  may  last  for  a  few  days, 
yet  it  is  evident,  from  what  has  been  said,  that  it  is  impossible  to 
treat  this  disease  upon  any  definite  plan  which  does  not  take  account 
of  the  immediate  exciting  cause.  Symptomatic  treatment  will  often 
afford  relief  during  the  height  of  the  attack,  but,  during  the  inter- 


94  RESPIRATION. 

vals,  empiric  efforts  must  be  made  to  ascertain  the  exciting  cause  in 
eacli  case,  since  it  is  only  by  successful  treatment  of  the  cause  that 
the  patient  can  be  freed  from  subsequent  attacks. 

Hitherto  attention  has  been  confined  to  forms  of  asthma  which 
are  not  associated  with  other  general  diseases,  but  special  varieties 
are  of  fairly  common  occurrence,  as,  for  example,  the  asthma  con- 
nected with  advanced  Bright's  disease,  or  that  which  occurs  with 
arthritic  affections,  either  of  gouty  or  rheumatic  origin  ;  when  such 
general  diseases  are  known  to  coexist,  they  will  call  for  the  special 
treatment  appropriate  to  these  conditions,  as  well  as  for  the  treat- 
ment of  prominent  symptoms. 

During  an  attack  of  bronchial  asthma,  relief  can  be  most  readily 
effected  by  inhalations,  since  these  will  influence  the  bronchial 
mucous  membrane  and  favor  relaxation  of  contracted  muscle.  The 
inhalations  which  are  preferred  are  those  which  arise  during  the 
smouldering  of  strips  of  unglazed  paper  which  have  been  previously 
soaked  in  a  concentrated  solution  of  potassium  nitrate  and  carefully 
dried.  When  required  for  use,  these  strips  of  paper  are  folded  and 
placed  in  a  soup-plate,  one  corner  of  the  paper  is  then  ignited,  and 
the  patient  inhales  the  nitrous  fumes  as  they  rise.  The  action  is 
sometimes  increased  by  mixing  various  proportions  of  potassium 
chlorate  with  the  potassium  nitrate ;  potassium  iodide  may  be 
similarly  used. 

The  inhalation  of  amyl  nitrite  has  been  strongly  recommended, 
and  in  exceptional  cases  it  may  give  relief,  but  even  then  the  diffi- 
culty of  breathing  is  likely  to  return  soon  after  the  inhalation  has 
ceased.  Chloroform  and  ether  are  occasionally  employed,  and, 
under  conditions  of  great  exhaustion,  they  may  enable  the  patient 
to  obtain  a  few  snatches  of  sleep,  though  they  cannot  be  relied  upon 
to  cut  short  an  attack. 

Ethyl  iodide  has  been  credited  with  more  lasting  power  ;  it  acts 
not  only  as  an  antispasmodic,  but  it  appears  to  be  of  some  value  in 
bronchial  catarrh,  and  during  its  inhalation  sleep  may  ensue  after 
the  chest  has  been  relieved  of  expectoration.  The  most  favored 
remedies,  however,  in  connection  with  spasmodic  asthma  are  those 
which  are  derived  from  solanaceous  plants,  and  although  belladonna 
and  hyoscyamus  are  sometimes  used,  stramonium  occupies  the  fore- 
most place.  Stramonium  leaves  may  be  made  into  cigarettes,  and, 
when  coarsely  powdered,  the  leaves  of  eucalyptus  or  of  coca  have 
been  similarly  employed  ;  lobelia  also  may  be  used  in  the  same  way. 


BRONCHIAL  ASTHMA.  95 

Martindale  states  that  in  most  of  the  powders  and  cigarettes  sold  as 
nostrnms  for  the  relief  of  asthma  by  inhalation,  nitre  is  constantly 
and  stramonium  is  generally  an  ingredient  ( TAe  Extra  Pharmaco- 
poeia, ninth  edition,  p.  383).  Thus  Himrod's  Cure,  Bliss's  Cure, 
and  the  Green  Mountain  Cure  may  be  imitated  by  the  following  : 

"  Pulvis  lobelise  compositus. 

"  Potassium  nitrate  240,  boiling  distilled  water  240.  Dissolve 
and  add  to  lobelia  in  powder,  stramonium  leaves  in  powder,  black 
tea  in  powder,  240  of  each.  Mix  well,  dry,  and  add  oil  of  anise 
1.  The  fames  of  half  a  teaspoonful  or  more,  burnt  on  a  plate,  to 
be  inhaled  six  or  eight  times  a  day,  and  the  bedroom  fumigated 
with  the  same." 

When  stramonium  and  nitre  are  used  alone  they  are  ordinarily 
mixed  in  the  proportions  of  two  parts  of  stramonium  leaves  in 
coarse  powder  to  one  part  of  nitre.  Arsenical  cigarettes,  impreg- 
nated with  sodium  arsenate,  so  that  each  contains  f  gr.  of  the  salt, 
are  occasionally  recommended,  and  three  or  four  deep  inhalations  of 
the  fumes  sometimes  give  relief.  The  dry  fumes  which  result  from 
smouldering  are  perhaps  most  beneficial  when  the  asthmatic  attack 
is  accompanied  by  little  or  no  expectoration,  but  when  moist  rales 
are  present  and  indicate  that  bronchial  spasm  is  associated  with 
some  degree  of  engorgement,  or  even  of  bronchitis,  further  relief 
may  sometimes  be  afforded  by  the  inhalation  of  steam  alone,  or  of 
steam  impregnated  with  some  volatile  substance,  such  as  the  com- 
pound tincture  of  benzoin,  oil  of  cajuput,  oil  of  turpentine,  or  of 
eucalyptus. 

Occasionally  an  attack  of  asthma  may  be  cut  short  by  provoking 
nausea  rapidly,  either  by  means  of  ipecacuanha,  given  internally  in 
emetic  doses,  or  by  recommending  the  use  of  tobacco  for  those  who 
are  not  accustomed  to  smoking.  Fagge  considers  tobacco  to  be  the 
best  remedy  for  hay  asthma,  and  adds  significantly  that  those  who 
smoke  habitually  are  incapable  of  deriving  benefit  from  it. 

Germain  See  thinks  that  pyridine,  which  is  present  in  nicotine  in 
the  fumes  of  tobacco,  is,  in  all  probability,  the  active  agent  in  reliev- 
ing the  dyspnoea  of  asthma,  and  accordingly  recommends  that  pyri- 
dine should  be  used  by  itself  in  the  treatment  of  this  condition. 
Pyridine  is  placed  on  a  plate  in  a  small  room,  in  which  the  patient 
remains  from  twenty  to  thirty  minutes,  three  times  a  day. 

Cigarettes  of  the  powder  of  cubebs  are  sometimes  of  very  great 
service,  but  they  appear  to  be  most  valuable  when  there  is  much 


96  RESPIRATION. 

bronchial  secretion.  When  respiration  is  very  seriously  impeded, 
and  when  there  is  much  cyanosis,  inhalations  of  oxygen  may  be 
used  occasionally.  These  relieve  the  cyanotic  condition  and  the 
dyspnoea,  but  they  do  not  appear  to  influence  the  spasm  of  the 
bronchi. 

The  remedies  employed  internally  are  almost  as  numerous  as 
those  used  for  inhalation,  but  they  possess  the  obvious  disadvantage 
of  being  more  slow  in  their  action.  Some  are  used  with  the  distinct 
object  of  acting  as  sedatives  ;  others  are  intended  to  act  as  alter- 
atives, and  are,  therefore,  more  serviceable  during  the  intervals  be- 
tween the  attacks  of  spasm.  Of  the  sedatives  morphine  is  perhaps 
the  most  useful,  and  the  rapidity  of  action  may  be  increased  by  its 
injection  hypodermatically.  Doses  of  from  ^  to  ^  gr.,  given  with 
I'h'Q  ^^  'WQ  ^^'  Q-tropine  sulphate,  will  occasionally  soothe  excite- 
ment, check  spasm  and  favor  sleep.  Morphine  has  obvious  dangers, 
however,  in  the  treatment  of  a  disease  of  chronic  character  like 
asthma,  but  many  sufferers  prefer  to  run  the  risks  of  acquiring  the 
morphine  habit  rather  than  to  endure  the  discomforts  of  asthma. 
Chloral  hydrate  is  occasionally  employed  instead  of  morphine,  but 
it  must  be  used  with  some  discrimination  on  account  of  its  depres- 
sant influence  upon  the  circulation.  Cannabis  indica  has  often 
been  recommended  and  is  occasionally  of  great  service.  Mention 
has,  however,  already  been  made  in  these  pages  of  the  uncertainty 
of  action  of  various  preparations  of  this  drug,  and  it  is,  therefore, 
advisable  always  to  commence  with  small  doses  and  to  increase  the 
amount  gradually,  if  no  immediate  result  is  obtained. 

The  ethereal  tincture  of  lobelia  of  the  British  Pharmaeopoeia  may 
be  used  in  doses  of  from  5  to  15  minims,  and  the  action  is  some- 
times very  much  increased  by  the  addition  of  potassium  bromide, 
or  iodide.  The  extract  of  stramonium  is  occasionally  employed 
internally,  in  doses  of  J  to  1  grain,  but  the  action  is  slow,  and  there 
can  be  no  doubt  that  this  drug  is  much  more  serviceable  when  used 
as  an  inhalation.  Hyoscine  hydrobromate,  in  doses  of  -g-io"  ^^^  tto" 
gr.,  by  hypodermatic  injection  or  by  the  mouth,  is  sometimes  of 
great  service  when  the  attack  has  been  of  long  duration,  and  the 
patient  is  becoming  exhausted  from  want  of  sleep.  I  have  fre- 
quently found  that  in  asthmatic  attacks  associated  with  much  bron- 
chitis, the  most  speedy  relief  is  afforded  by  full  doses  of  spiritus 
setheris  ;  the  breath  mixture  of  our  hospital,  which  contains  equal 
parts  of  spiritus  setheris  and  of  spiritus  ammonii  aromaticus,  has 


BRONCHIAL  ASTHMA.  97 

often  cut  short  an  attack  and  favored  the  removal  of  fluid  from  the 
bronchi. 

Although,  in  general,  the  sedative  plan  is  that  which  is  most 
favored,  some  patients  prefer  the  use  of  remedies  which  promote 
wakefulness  ;  thus  strong,  hot  coffee,  or  a  full  dose  of  citrated 
caffeine,  may  prevent  the  feeling  of  exhaustion  which  so  constantly 
ensues  after  a  number  of  hours  have  been  spent  in  fighting  for 
breath,  and  this  treatment  may  perhaps  be  defended,  as  the  severity 
of  the  attack  will  often  pass  off  in  the  early  morning  and  allow  the 
patient  to  sink  into  quiet  slumber. 

Strychnine  and  nux  vomica  may  also  be  employed,  but,  on  ac- 
count of  their  tonic  action,  they  are  more  serviceable  if  administered 
in  the  intervals  between  the  different  attacks  of  spasm.  Reference 
has  already  been  made  to  the  employment  of  ipecacuanha  in  emetic 
doses.  Other  emetics  will  sometimes  give  relief,  and,  in  severe 
cases,  it  may  occasionally  be  worth  trying  the  effect  of  apomorphine 
either  hypodermatically  or  given  by  the  mouth. 

During  the  attack,  stimulants  are  sometimes  very  useful,  espe- 
cially if  given  in  repeated  small  doses  with  hot  water,  and  they 
counteract  much  of  the  depression  and  exhaustion  which  usually 
accompanies  an  attack  of  asthma. 

Pilocarpine  has  sometimes  been  recommended  for  this  condition 
on  account  of  the  rapidity  with  which  it  promotes  bronchial  as  well 
as  salivary  secretion.  Bronchial  mucus  is  generally  expectorated 
in  increasing  quantities  toward  the  end  of  an  attack  of  asthma,  and 
it  has,  therefore,  been  thought  that  the  attack  might  be  curtailed  if 
this  expectoration  could  be  hastened.  It  must  be  urged,  however, 
against  the  use  of  pilocarpine,  that  it  frequently  causes  considerable 
depression,  and  with  this  disease  the  patient  is  already  the  subject 
of  exhaustion. 

The  bronchitis  which  ordinarily  follows  a  severe  attack  of  spas- 
modic asthma  must  be  treated  on  general  principles. 

During  the  intervals  between  the  attacks,  tonic  measures  are  fre- 
quently of  great  service,  as,  for  example,  the  administration  of  some 
form  of  arsenic,  of  nux  vomica,  or  of  strychnine,  or  the  use  of  large 
doses  of  potassium  iodide.  These  drugs  are  sometimes  very  useful 
when  the  causal  indications  of  asthma  are  not  apparent.  Change  of 
air  will  sometimes  prove  beneficial,  though  it  is  impossible  to  lay 
down  any  definite  rule.  Most  patients  are  better  in  smoky  towns, 
and  Fagge  mentions  one  patient  who  found  that  he  could  only  live 


98  RESPIRATION. 

in  perfect  freedom  from  asthma  in  the  Seven  Dials.  On  the  other 
hand,  when  asthma  is  found  to  develop  in  large  centres  of  civiliza- 
tion it  will  be  well  to  try  the  effect  of  change  either  to  the  seaside 
or  to  mountainous  or  hilly  districts. 

Emphysema.  Emphysema  is  one  of  those  chronic  diseases 
which  it  is  difficult  to  treat  when  free  from  complications  ;  on  the 
other  hand,  it  is  so  commonly  associated  with  severe  attacks  of 
bronchial  catarrh,  or  even  with  attacks  of  bronchial  spasm,  that 
patients  are  extremely  prone  to  seek  treatment  and  to  follow  advice 
during  that  time  only  when  they  are  troubled  by  these  complica- 
tions, while  in  the  intervals  of  such  attacks  it  is  often  somewhat 
difficult  to  induce  them  to  adopt  any  precautionary  measures  what- 
ever. To  some  extent  emphysema  may  be  prevented  by  careful 
avoidance  of  the  causes  :  over-indulgence  in  various  forms  of 
athleticism  has  been  credited  with  the  production  of  emphysema, 
and  it  has  been  thought  that  the  strain  of  the  air  cells  by  forced 
efforts  of  respiration  might  favor  the  onset  of  this  anatomical 
change  ;  accordingly  those  who  object  to  athletic  sports  are  likely 
to  forbid  indulgence  in  such  sports  and  to  terrorize  their  patients 
with  the  dread  evils  they  may  consequently  incur.  Inasmuch  as 
such  sports  may  perhaps  favor  the  onset  of  acute  pulmonary  affec- 
tions such  as  acute  bronchitis,  they  certainly  may  favor  the  onset 
of  emphysema.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  emphysema  of  the 
lung  is  a  frequent  sequel  of  repeated  attacks  of  acute  or  chronic 
bronchitis,  and  also  that  it  often  arises,  especially  amongst  young 
adults,  when  whooping-cough  is  allowed  to  run  its  course  with  but 
little  medicinal  treatment.  In  such  cases  the  bronchi  may  become 
dilated  and  thus  lead  to  bronchiectasis,  or,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
air  cells  may  dilate  with  the  rupture  of  the  walls  of  the  alveoli,  so 
that  two  or  more  air  cells  are  thrown  into  direct  communication 
with  each  other.  Those  who  suffer  from  bronchial  asthma — that 
is,  from  the  true  variety  in  which  spasm  of  the  muscles  of  the 
bronchi  opposes  the  freedom  of  movement  of  air — are  also  extremely 
likely  to  develop  emphysema.  It  is  accordingly  necessary  to  treat 
such  conditions  continuously  and  energetically,  in  order  to  diminish 
the  risk  of  developing  an  emphysematous  condition  of  the  lungs. 

Another  class  of  individuals  amongst  whom  the  disease  is  fairly 
common  consists  of  those  who  habitually,  from  their  occupation,  are 
expDsed  to  severe  muscular  strain,  especially  if  at  the  same  time  the 
dietary  of  the  individual  is  of  a  poor  character.     It  is,  therefore. 


EMPHYSEMA.  99 

common  amongst  laborers,  and  it  is  frequently  seen  amongst  soldiers 
who  have  been  through  exhausting  camj)aigns. 

Should  a  patient  with  emphysema  come  under  treatment  during 
an  attack  of  bronchial  catarrh,  the  main  efforts  have  to  be  directed 
toward  relieving  the  latter  condition,  and  remedies  should  be  em- 
ployed which  will  render  the  expectoration  more  liquid  and  perhaps 
more  abundant ;  at  the  same  time,  the  treatment  should  be  calcu- 
lated to  reduce  the  frequency  and  to  diminish  the  intensity  of 
cough,  since  a  succession  of  violent  expiratory  efforts  can  only  tend 
to  make  matters  worse.  It  is  accordingly  advisable  to  reduce  the 
viscid  character  of  the  expectoration  by  the  administration  of  ex- 
pectorants, such  as  ammonium  carbonate,  senega,  spirit  of  chloro- 
form, and  other  remedies  already  mentioned  in  connection  with 
chronic  bronchitis.  The  administration  of  opiates,  provided  that 
the  fluid  within  the  bronchi  is  not  excessive  in  amount,  Avill  also 
reduce  the  frequency  of  cough  in  this  condition.  The  treatment 
demands  considerable  circumspection,  since,  in  some  cases,  stimulant 
expectorants  are  unnecessary  and  really  undesirable  ;  for  example, 
when  the  patient  is  bringing  up  a  quantity  of  frothy  mucus,  which 
he  expectorates  with  comparative  ease,  it  is  advisable  to  employ 
tonic  remedies  together  with  acid  to  diminish  the  amount  of  ex- 
pectoration, and  it  is  therefore  well  to  be  sparing  in  the  use  of 
opiates  in  such  cases  ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  when  there  is  con- 
stant troublesome  cough  with  but  little  expectoration,  when  in  fact 
the  frequency  of  cough  is  unnecessary  and  is  dependent  on  an 
abnormally  sensitive  condition  of  the  mucous  membrane,  opiates 
must  be  employed. 

Many  cases  of  emphysema  and  bronchitis  occurring  in  advanced 
middle  age  derive  benefit  from  the  use  of  ether,  a  remedy  which 
often  gives  relief  with  comparative'  rapidity,  particularly  in  those 
cases  associated  with  much  bronchial  spasm.  It  will  often  be  found 
that  the  chief  difficulty  consists  in  expiratory  dyspnoea,  and  when 
this  symptom  is  present,  ether  should  be  employed  with  a  free  hand. 
Under  such  circumstances,  also,  various  inhalations  may  give  con- 
siderable relief  ;  for  example,  inhalations  of  conium,  of  turpentine, 
or  of  compound  tincture  of  benzoin.  Under  their  influence  the 
spasm  may  sometimes  be  relaxed  and  the  removal  of  expectoration 
facilitated.  For  the  relief  of  the  same  condition,  various  nitrites 
have  been  essayed,  and  of  these  amyl  nitrite  has  been  employed 
with  the  greatest  amount  of  sanguine  expectation.     I  must  confess 


100  BESPIBATION. 

that,  in  my  hands,  this  remedy  has  given  somewhat  disappointing 
resnlts,  and  that  I  have  found  that  except  in  rare  cases  greater  value 
attaches  to  remedies  of  more  continuous  action.  The  spirit  of 
glonoin  has  often  given  some  relief  in  patients  with  tense  arteries 
and  much  expiratory  dyspnoea,  and  the  more  recently  introduced 
erythrol  tetranitrate  has  been  used  for  the  same  purpose. 

In  plethoric  individuals,  with  much  cyanosis,  benefit  occasionally 
results  from  venesection,  and  although  this  treatment  has  rather 
fallen  into  disuse,  I  have  on  many  occasions  seen  the  removal  of 
some  ten  ounces  of  blood  followed  by  increased  facility  of  respir- 
ation, and  in  some  cases  by  a  return  of  consciousness.  When  the 
condition  of  the  patient  is  severe,  and  when  the  weakness  precludes 
the  possibility  of  venesection,  relief  of  a  temporary  character  may  be 
afforded  by  the  inhalation  of  oxygen.  It  must  be  remembered, 
however,  that  the  improvement  following  the  use  of  oxygen  is 
purely  temporary,  and  that  it  must  be  conjoined  with  the  adminis- 
tration of  expectorants  and  in  extreme  cases  with  the  use  of  emetics, 
since  if  the  oxygen  is  inhaled,  notwithstanding  the  relief  to  the 
breathing  powers,  expectoration  may  tend  to  accumulate  unless 
energetic  measures  are  simultaneously  employed. 

It  will  often  be  found  that  it  is  necessary  to  use  remedies  calcu- 
lated to  improve  the  force  of  contraction  of  the  ventricles,  since 
danger  lies  in  the  accumulation  of  blood  on  the  right  side  of  the 
heart  and  the  over-distention  of  the  right  ventricle.  The  remedies 
most  frequently  employed  are  digitalis  and  strophanthus,  but  on 
account  of  its  power  on  the  bronchial  mucous  membrane  squill  is 
often  used,  more  particularly  in  those  cases  where  it  is  deemed 
advisable  to  attempt  to  reduce  the  amount  of  expectoration  by  the 
use  of  acid  remedies.  The  syrup  of  squill,  which  is  prepared  from 
the  acetum,  is  an  acid  preparation  which  is  quite  compatible  with 
dilute  sulphuric  acid,  or  with  most  of  the  preparations  of  iron. 

As  the  case  progresses  tonics  are  generally  indicated,  and  there  is 
great  advantage  in  using  acid  tonics.  Quinine  may  be  administered 
in  moderate  doses,  together  with  dilute  sulphuric  acid,  with  iron  or 
with  spirit  of  chloroform.  Much  benefit  frequently  ensues  from 
the  use  of  strychnine  and  nux  vomica,  which,  in  addition  to  their 
ordinary  tonic  power  on  the  digestive  system,  undoubtedly  strengthen 
the  contractions  of  the  ventricle.  For  its  tonic  properties  and  for 
its  influence  upon  the  respiration,  arsenic  is  also  administered  with 
comparative  frequency,   especially  in  the    intervals    between    the 


EMPHYSEMA.  101 

attacks  of  bronchial  catarrh.  The  preparation  of  arsenic  selected 
will  vary,  to  some  extent,  with  the  other  drugs  which  are  to  be 
administered  simultaneously.  The  official  solution  of  arsenous  acid 
may  be  given  in  conjunction  with  acids,  while  Fowler's  solution  is 
perhaps  more  particularly  suitable  when  alkalies  are  indicated,  or 
when  it  is  desired  to  administer  arsenic  by  itself.  Since,  in  cases 
of  emphysema,  it  is  necessary  to  continue  the  use  of  these  tonics 
for  a  great  length  of  time,  patients  often  prefer  to  take  them  in  pill 
form,  and  arsenic  can  then  be  given  as  in  chlorosis,  in  the  form  of 
the  iron  arsenate,  together  with  ferrous  sulphate,  or  as  arsenous 
acid  in  conjunction  with  the  ferrous  sulphate,  or  carbonate. 

As  the  general  nutrition  is  liable  to  suffer  during  emphysema, 
cod-liver  oil  will  prove  beneficial,  both  in  restoring  breathing  power 
and  in  improving  the  percentage  of  haemoglobin.  Efforts  have  been 
made  from  time  to  time  to  employ  compressed  air  for  this  affection, 
and  many  devices  have  been  arranged  by  which  this  treatment  can 
be  used,  even  in  the  homes  of  the  patient.  This  form  of  treatment 
is  perhaps  not  so  frequent  at  the  present  time  as  it  was  a  few  years 
ago,  but  numerous  cases  are  recorded  in  which  the  shortness  of 
breath  and  the  tendency  to  bronchial  catarrh  both  appear  to  have 
been  relieved.  It  has  already  been  stated  that  oxygen  can  be  bene- 
ficially employed  in  severe  cases  with  bronchial  catarrh,  but  there 
appears  to  be  very  little  advantage  in  the  employment  either  of 
oxygen  or  of  compressed  air  when  the  patient  is  free  from  signs  of 
bronchial  irritation.  There  can  be  no  doubt,  however,  that  many 
emphysematous  patients  derive  benefit  from  change  of  air,  especially 
when  their  means  will  permit  the  winter  to  be  spent  in  one  or  other 
of  the  southern  health  resorts.  The  liability  to  bronchitis,  which 
really  constitutes  the  chief  danger  in  connection  with  emphysema, 
is  very  greatly  diminished  by  residence  in  a  dry  and  fairly  equable 
temperature.  Mountain  air  has  been  tried  for  these  cases,  but  they 
derive  less  benefit  from  residence  at  a  high  altitude  than  from  resi- 
dence near  the  sea  :  as,  for  example,  Thomasville,  Ga.,  or  Southern 
Pines,  S.  C,  or  at  IN^ice  or  Mentone,  Cannes  or  Bordighera.  When 
patients  have  had  several  severe  attacks  of  winter  cough  and  their 
lungs  show  advanced  physical  signs  of  emphysema,  they  should,  if 
possible,  go  still  further,  to  Algiers,  to  Madeira,  or  to  Teneriffe. 
Residence  in  Egypt  during  the  winter  months  sometimes  proves 
beneficial,  but  these  patients  have  to  remember  the  risk  of  chills 
with  the  sudden  fall  of  the  temperature  after  sunset,  and  frequently, 


102  RESPIRATION. 

on  account  of  the  liability  to  bronchial  spasm,  they  have  to  be  very 
cautious  in  avoiding  the  sand  storms  which  occasionally  arise  with 
great  suddenness. 

Patients  with  emphysema  should  adopt  a  form  of  diet  which  is  at 
once  nourishing,  supporting,  and  yet  not  calculated  to  increase 
weight  to  any  great  extent.  An  emphysematous  patient  should 
never  allow  himself  to  get  stout,  and  his  dietary  should  accordingly 
be  regulated  so  as  to  eliminate  any  articles  of  food  by  which  this 
tendency  might  be  increased.  With  the  same  object,  to  a  certain 
extent,  and  also  with  the  idea  of  facilitating  the  breathing  powers, 
emphysematous  patients  should  be  encouraged  to  take  as  much  mus- 
cular exercise  as  possible  short  of  producing  fatigue  or  dyspnoea. 
Moderate  courses  of  exercises  with  dumb  bells,  or  with  Indian  clubs, 
or  with  one  or  other  form  of  chest  expanders  which  have  lately 
come  into  vogue,  will  often  materially  assist  the  breathing  power. 
All  such  exercises,  however,  should  not  be  carried  to  the  stage  of 
exhaustion,  and  when  adopted  they  should  be  commenced  gradually 
and  increased  gradually.  When  taking  athletic  exercises  it  is  also 
advisable  to  avoid  risks  of  chill ;  thus,  for  example,  although  em- 
physematous patients  may  gradually  increase  their  general  comfort 
by  such  means  as  riding,  cycling,  or  rowing,  yet  the  risk  of  in- 
ducing bronchitis,  owing  to  exposure  to  wet,  must  be  always  borne 
in  mind. 

Another  hygienic  measure  which  demands  mention  is  the  em- 
ployment of  laxatives,  or  even  purgatives,  by  which  the  general 
tendency  to  constipation ,  may  be  avoided.  It  is  a  curious  fact  that 
most  patients  with  emphysema  suffer  from  constipation  and  from 
flatulent  distention,  and,  inasmuch  as  both  of  these  conditions  tend 
to  impede  the  movements  of  the  diaphragm,  while  the  thoracic  move- 
ments are  already  interfered  with,  owing  to  the  emphysema,  it  must 
be  obvious  that  both  purgatives  and  antispasmodics  form  an  essen- 
tial routine  treatment. 

Without  being  able  to  explain  its  mode  of  action,  potassium 
iodide  is  undoubtedly  often  of  great  service  in  the  treatment  of  em- 
physema in  the  intervals  between  the  attacks  of  bronchial  catarrh  ; 
and  when  employing  this  drug  it  will  often  be  found  that,  as  in 
syphilitic  conditions,  comparatively  large  doses  can  be  tolerated  and 
continued,  while  smaller  doses  produce  symptoms  of  iodism. 

Attempts  have  been  made  to  reduce  the  sensitive  character  of  the 
mucous  membrane  by  the  employment  of  various  forms  of  sprays. 


HEMOPTYSIS.  ]03 

Those  which  are  of  the  greatest  value  are  saline  or  alkaline  sprays. 
A  spray  of  common  salt,  or  a  spray  of  sodium  bicarbonate,  used 
occasionally  at  night,  appears  to  reduce  the  liability  to  bronchial 
catarrh,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  a  spray  of  ipecacuanha  will  some- 
times give  great  relief  when  the  attack  of  bronchial  catarrh  is  im- 
pending. 

The  whole  treatment  of  emphysema  has  to  be  largely  determined 
by  the  financial  position  oP  the  patient.  A  workingman  will 
struggle  on  through  successive  attacks  of  winter  cough,  and  will 
only  present  himself  for  treatment  when  the  bronchial  catarrh  is 
extreme,  and  he  will  then  come  to  the  hospital  for  admission.  He 
will  leave  when  the  urgency  of  the  bronchial  catarrh  has  passed 
away,  and  in  the  intervals  between  his  attacks  he  is  not  likely  to 
be  seen  or  to  submit  to  any  interference  with  the  ordinary  routine 
of  his  life.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  when  dealing  with  patients 
whose  circumstances  allow  them  to  adopt  measures  to  counteract  the 
liability  to  bronchial  attacks,  the  treatment  of  emphysema  becomes 
somewhat  more  hopeful  as  the  need  of  treatment  for  bronchial 
catarrh  is  diminished. 

Haemoptysis.  The  treatment  of  haemoptysis,  like  the  prognosis, 
is  to  a  great  extent  dependent  upon  the  severity  of  the  attack  ;  but 
although  an  attack  of  haemoptysis  may  be  comparatively  trifling  so 
far  as  the  actual  loss  of  blood  is  concerned,  it  is  advisable  to  regard 
every  case,  at  the  commencement  at  least,  as  having  the  possibility 
of  becoming  hazardous  at  any  moment,  if  proper  treatment  is  not 
adopted.  The  preliminary  hemorrhage  may  be  slight  and  may 
occur  after  some  comparatively  trifling  overstrain,  but  if  precau- 
tions are  not  promptly  taken,  an  attack  commencing  mildly  may  be 
speedily  followed  by  severe  hemorrhage.  It  is,  therefore,  necessary 
to  minimize  the  risks  of  such  an  occurrence  by  keeping  the  patient 
at  rest,  so  soon  as  any  sign  of  hgemoptysis  is  apparent.  The  patient 
should  be  strictly  kept  to  his  bed  for  many  days  after  the  com- 
mencement, and  well  protected  from  cold  by  sufficient  clothing. 
The  bedclothes  should  be  light  and  not  overheating.  The  room 
should  be  well  ventilated  and  kept  at  a  relatively  low  temperature, 
and,  to  some  extent,  the  position  of  the  patient  should  be  controlled. 
The  head  and  shoulders  should  be  raised  so  that  he  assumes  a  semi- 
sitting posture,  and  lie  should  be  directed  to  limit  his  movements  as 
far  as  possible.  All  sources  of  irritation  and  anxiety  should  be 
removed,  inasmuch  as  any  sudden  alteration  in  the  rapidity  of  the 


104  RESPIRATION. 

circulation  might  be  followed  by  an  increase  of  the  hemorrhage. 
While,  therefore,  the  seriousness  of  the  condition  is  not  to  be  denied, 
sympathetic  friends  should  be  rigidly  excluded  from  the  room.  A 
patient  with  haemoptysis  is  already,  in  all  probability,  sufficieatly 
concerned  about  himself,  and  should  not  be  further  alarmed  by  a 
succession  of  anxious  faces  and  anxious  inquiries.  It  is,  therefore, 
better,  in  most  cases,  to  secure  the  co-operation  of  an  intelligent 
nurse  than  to  leave  the  patient  to  be  attended  to  purely  by  relatives. 

Before  entering  into  any  consideration  of  the  dietary,  it  is  desir- 
able to  follow  out  the  immediate  treatment  that  should  be  adopted, 
and  I  would  venture  to  lay  stress  upon  the  importance  of  adopting 
many  measures  for  the  relief  of  this  condition,  measures  that  can  be 
repeated  at  short  intervals,  so  as  to  soothe  the  patient  Avith  the 
assurance  that  something  is  being  done  for  his  relief.  It  is  essen- 
tial, in  cases  of  haemoptysis,  to  quiet  the  patient's  anxieties  by  every 
means  in  our  power,  and  it  is,  therefore,  most  injudicious  to  be  too 
skeptical  about  the  power  of  remedies  to  check  hemorrhage,  or  to 
allow  such  a  skeptical  attitude  to  be  apparent  to  the  patient.  Every- 
thing should  be  done  with  the  appearance  of  certainty  of  benefit, 
and  every  care  should  be  taken  to  avoid  the  least  suspicion  in  the 
patient's  mind  that  treatment  is  of  little  avail.  From  the  first, 
therefore,  it  is  desirable  to  give  small  pieces  of  ice  to  suck,  inas- 
much as  this  will  tend  to  reduce  the  frequency  of  cough  and  con- 
sequently the  frequency  with  which  the  patient  is  alarmed  by  fresh 
appearances  of  blood  ;  at  the  same  time,  it  is  well  to  warn  him  that 
the  blood  which  continues  to  appear  after  each  effort  of  coughing  is 
blood  that  has  been,  in  all  probability,  poured  out  into  the  air 
passages  and  air  cells  with  the  original  rupture  of  the  bloodvessel, 
and  that,  therefore,  it  does  not  indicate  a  continuous  cause  for 
anxiety.  He  may  also  be  further  comforted  by  his  attention  being 
directed  to  the  gradual  alteration  in  the  appearance  of  the  blood 
that  is  expectorated,  the  frothy,  bright  hemorrhage  of  the  commence- 
ment of  haemoptysis  gradually  giving  place  to  darker  blood  of  less 
frothy  consistency,  which  may  be  expectorated  many  days  after  the 
onset  of  the  original  attack  of  haemoptysis. 

Should  the  physical  signs  permit  the  localization  of  the  site  of 
the  hemorrhage,  ice  may  be  applied  to  the  chest  over  the  affected 
part.  The  ice  may  be  inclosed  in  an  ordinary  india-rubber  bag, 
such  as  a  sponge  bag  ;  or  cold  may  be  used  by  wringing  out  towels 
in  ice-cold  water,  and  applying  them  to  the  surface  of  the  chest  and 


HAEMOPTYSIS.  105 

changing  them  repeatedly.  Should  Leiter's  tubes  be  at  hand,  they 
may  conveniently  be  applied  to  the  chest  over  the  affected  site. 
Even  when,  as  so  often  happens,  the  hemorrhage  is  followed  by 
moist  ri,les  at  all  parts  of  the  chest,  which  render  it  impossible  to 
speak  with  certainty  of  the  position  of  the  ruptured  vessel,  it  is 
desirable  to  employ  ice  over  the  front  of  the  chest.  At  the  same 
time  that  ice  is  being  used  it  is  advisable  to  administer  opium, 
which  not  only  serves  to  relieve  the  condition  of  extreme  anxiety, 
but  also  acts  beneficially  in  reducing  the  rapidity  and  force  of  the 
action  of  the  heart.  It  is  better  to  commence  with  a  fairly  large 
dose,  followed  at  short  intervals  by  smaller  doses,  or,  if  morphine 
is  available,  to  administer  a  small  dose  hypodermatically,  and  to 
repeat  this  dose  every  half-hour.  The  amount  administered  is  to 
be  regulated  by  the  age  and  the  strength  of  the  individual,  and  it  is 
not  to  be  pushed  to  the  amount  necessary  to  induce  sleep.  All  that 
is  desired  is  to  diminish  anxiety  and  to  reduce  blood-pressure, 
without  necessarily  diminishing  reflex  excitability  and  thus  allow- 
ing the  accumulation  of  blood  in  the  air  passages.  This  action  of 
morphine  and  of  opium  is  possibly  so  frequently  overlooked  or 
misunderstood  that  it  perhaps  demands  a  little  further  consider- 
ation here. 

All  who  have  witnessed  cases  of  poisoning  by  this  drug  must 
have  noticed  that  it  produces  diminished  depth  of  inspiration, 
diminished  frequency  of  respiration,  and  that  during  the  condition 
of  coma  the  pulse  also  is  weakened  in  character.  The  drug,  there- 
fore, so  far  as  circulation  and  respiration  are  concerned,  induces 
precisely  the  conditions  which  accompany  an  ordinary  fainting  fit, 
and  it  is  one  of  the  truisms  of  surgery  that  the  risk  from  hemor- 
rhage is  diminished  by  the  onset  of  an  attack  of  faintness  ;  since, 
while  the  heart  is  acting  slowly  and  feebly,  time  is  allowed  for  the 
natural  arrest  of  hemorrhage  by  alteration  in  the  wall  of  the  vessel 
and  by  clotting  of  blood  within  the  vessel  and  around  the  aperture. 
It  is  impossible,  in  haemoptysis,  to  control  the  hemorrhage  by  any 
of  the  ordinary  methods  adopted  in  surgery,  but  it  is  possible,  by 
means  of  opium,  to  favor  the  arrest  of  hemorrhage  by  producing 
changes  in  the  circulation  which  promote  or  favor  the  coagulation 
of  blood.  From  what  has  been  said,  the  advisability  of  repeating 
the  small  doses  of  opium  or  morphine  at  short  intervals  will  be 
apparent,  apart  from  any  question  of  satisfying  the  mind  of  the 
patient  or  his  friends  with  the  idea  that  something  is  being  done. 


106  BESPIRA  TION. 

Passing  on  now  to  further  questions  of  treatment,  should  it  be 
impossible  to  obtain  ice,  some  relief  may  occasionally  be  afforded 
by  dry  cupping  the  chest  over  the  affected  area.  This  treatment, 
however,  is  not  very  often  employed,  Whitla  strongly  recom- 
mends that  the  room  should  be  permeated  with  turpentine  vapor, 
and  thinks  that  this  is  beneficial  in  many  ways  ;  he  suggests  that  the 
turpentine  vapor  which  reaches  the  lung  may  act  as  a  haemostatic 
and  to  some  extent  as  an  antiseptic.  However  this  may  be,  it  will 
certainly  tend  to  soothe  and  allay  cough,  even  though  the  haemos- 
tatic action  that  has  been  claimed  for  it  may  be  open  to  doubt,  since 
it  appears  improbable  that  turpentine  vapor  pervading  a  room  can 
ever  be  inhaled  in  sufficient  amount  to  obtain  any  direct  haemostatic 
action.  Whitla  recommends  that  a  large  vessel  should  be  filled 
with  warm  water,  and  that  turpentine  should  be  poured  in  small 
quantities  into  this  at  frequent  intervals.  He  also  suggests  that 
turpentine  may  be  poured  upon  cloths  suspended  in  the  air,  or  that 
it  may  be  sprinkled  upon  sawdust,  or  upon  shavings  in  a  safe 
corner  of  the  room,  away  from  the  danger  of  ignition. 

With  regard  to  food  :  this  should  be  given  cold  and  in  liquid 
form,  and  only  small  quantities  should  be  taken  at  a  time  ;  in  fact, 
very  shortly  after  the  attack  of  haemoptysis,  it  is  better  not  to  give 
any  nourishment  unless  the  patient  becomes  extremely  weak.  The 
appearance  of  the  patient  and  the  weakness  of  the  pulse  might  often 
suggest  the  propriety  of  the  administration  of  alcohol.  This,  how- 
ever, is  as  a  rule  likely  to  do  harm  rather  than  good,  since  in  the 
initial  stages  of  haemoptysis  the  weakness  of  the  pulse  is,  to  a  certain 
degree,  a  conservative  process. 

Notwithstanding  the  large  number  of  haemostatics  employed  in 
medicine,  it  is  very  doubtful  to  what  extent  any  one  is  of  service  in 
haemoptysis,  since  the  haemostatic  has  ordinarily  to  be  absorbed  by 
the  bloodvessels  in  some  remote  part  of  the  body  before  being 
carried  to  the  lung,  where  its  effect  is  desired.  A  very  common 
routine  is  to  administer  ergot  hypodermatically,  and,  after  the  em- 
ployment in  this  way  of  a  full  pharmacopoeial  dose,  to  continue  the 
action  of  this  drug  by  the  administration  of  smaller  doses  by  the 
mouth.  Ergot  will  undoubtedly  cause  contraction  of  the  smaller 
arteries  within  the  lung,  and  it  is  well  known  that  the  first  effect 
of  the  action  of  ergot  is  to  cause  a  fall  of  the  blood-pressure  in  the 
systemic  circulation,  owing  to  the  contraction  of  the  pulmonary 
arterioles.     When,  therefore,  the  hemorrhage  proceeds  from  vessels 


HEMOPTYSIS.  107 

of  small  diameter,  this  contraction  of  arterioles  will  reduce  the  blood- 
pressure  at  the  affected  area,  and  thus  will  serve  to  arrest  hemor- 
rhage ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  although  in  many  cases  of  haemop- 
tysis the  hemorrhage  proceeds  from  small  vessels,  yet  in  cases  of 
unusual  severity  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  a  branch  of  a  larger 
vessel,  one  perhaps  crossing  a  phthisical  cavity,  has  become  in- 
volved ;  and  under  such  circumstances  the  administration  of  a  drug 
which  will  cause  contraction  of  the  terminal  twigs  of  the  arteries 
will  raise  the  blood-pressure  in  the  larger  vessels,  and  thus  will 
favor  further  hemorrhage,  instead  of  acting  as  a  remedial  agent.  I 
would,  therefore,  recommend  that  ergot  should  be  used  only  in 
those  cases  where  the  amount  of  the  hemorrhage,  or  the  physical 
signs,  render  it  probable  that  the  lesion  affects  vessels  of  small  size, 
and  that  it  should  not  be  employed  when  there  are  signs  of  a  large 
phthisical  cavity,  and  when  the  amount  of  hemorrhage  affords  an 
indication  that  a  large  vessel  has  given  way. 

Various  astringents  are  often  administered  with  a  view  of  favor- 
ing the  contraction  of  vessels,  and  of  increasing  the  coagulability 
of  the  blood.  Tannic  acid  and  gallic  acid  are  often  given  in  large 
amounts. 

R .  — Acidi  gallici  .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .  gr.  x. 

Tincturse  opii  camphoratse      .....  TTt^x. 

Acidi  sulphurici  diluti   ......  TTL^v. 

Aquse q.  s.  ad  ^j. 

S. — To  be  taken  three  or  four  times  a  day. 

Thirty  grains  of  either  of  these  astringents  have  been  recom- 
mended. I  feel  extremely  doubtful  about  the  benefit  resulting  from 
their  employment,  and  I  have  on  several  occasions  thought  that  the 
benefit,  if  any,  was  rather  dearly  purchased  at  the  expense  of  the 
great  disturbance  of  digestion  which  resulted  from  their  use.  I  re- 
member one  patient  in  particular,  a  young  medical  man,  for  whom 
this  treatment  had  been  adopted,  and  his  complaints  of  gastric  pain, 
of  nausea,  and  of  loss  of  appetite  were  very  distressing. 

I  am  always  reluctant  to  employ  a  remedy  which,  while  of  doubt- 
ful avail  so  far  as  the  diseased  process  is  concerned,  possesses  a 
marked  action  in  interfering  with  the  subsequent  nutrition  ;  and 
although  it  has  been  recommended  above  that  only  small  quantities 
of  food  should  be  administered  at  a  time,  it  is  essential  that  the 
treatment  adopted  should  not  render  nutrition  a  painful  process. 
Lead  acetate  is  another  remedy  that  has  been  used  in  cases  of 


108  RESPIRATION. 

haemoptysis,  and  a  pill  of  lead  acetate  (gr.  3)  and  opium  (gr.  J) 
is  often  recommended,  although  perhaps  it  is  of  greater  value  in 
intestinal  hemorrhage  than  in  hemorrhage  from  the  lung.  With  a 
view  of  favoring  coagulation,  dilute  sulphuric  acid  has  been  fre- 
quently employed,  while  alum  in  small  doses  has  been  given  with 
the  same  object. 

R. — Acidi  sulphuric!  diluti   ......  TlXxx. 

Tincturse  opii  .......  TTLv. 

Spiritus  chloroformi        ......  TTLxx. 

Aquae  cinnamomi   .         .         .         .         .       q.  s.  ad  ^j. 

R .  — Aceti  scillae TTtx. 

Acidi  sulphurici  diluti  ......  TTL^- 

Spiritus  chloroformi       ......  TTlx. 

Syrupi 3j. 

Aquse  destillatse      .         .         .         .         .       q.  s.  ad  §j. 

Both  of  these  remedies,  if  administered,  should  be  given  well 
diluted,  so  as  to  diminish,  as  far  as  possible,  the  risk  of  disordering 
the  digestion.  Compounds  of  iron,  more  particularly  the  astrin- 
gent preparations,  are  often  useful,  and  the  sulphate,  the  acetate, 
or  the  chloride  have  been  employed,  with  the  hope  of  favoring  coagu- 
lability ;  but  all  of  these  also  require  to  be  administered  in  a  very 
dilute  form.  The  urgency  of  the  case  is  by  no  means  an  indication 
for  the  need  of  a  large  dose.  •  Even  when  hemorrhage  continues,  it 
is  far  better,  when  using  one  of  these  remedies,  to  give  small  doses 
repeatedly,  than  to  give  a  massive  dose  which  will  almost  certainly 
interfere  with  digestion.  Should  any  of  these  strong  astringents  be 
used,  the  simultaneous  employment  of  purgatives  will  be  necessary, 
since  considerable  risk  may  be  incurred  by  their  promoting  constipa- 
tion, and  thus  causing  violent  expiratory  efforts.  When  these  remedies 
have  been  used,  a  saline  purgative  is  frequently  beneficial ;  and  if 
the  action  is  at  all  retarded,  it  is  better  to  employ  enemata,  or 
glycerin  suppositories,  than  to  permit  constipation  to  continue.  Prep- 
arations of  hamamelis  have  been  administered  in  cases  of  haemop- 
tysis, but  the  action  is  somewhat  slow,  and,  indeed,  in  this  disease 
it  is  rather  doubtful  whether  this  drug  exercises  any  beneficial 
effects.  Some  practitioners  are  in  favor  of  the  internal  use  of  tur- 
pentine, given  in  moderate  doses  at  repeated  short  intervals  ;  this 
remedy  has  often  appeared  to  act  beneficially,  since,  as  in  cases  of 
chronic  bronchitis,  it  in  all  probability  favors  the  removal  of  the 
fluid  contents  of  the  air  passages,  and,  to  some  extent,  prevents 
decomposition  and  resulting  fetor. 


HEMOPTYSIS.  109 

Amyl  nitrite  has  been  administered  as  an  inhalation  in  some  cases 
of  profuse  haemoptysis,  and  it  is  most  likely  to  be  of  service  when 
the  hemorrhage  is  proceeding  from  a  vessel  of  small  size.  The 
dilatation  of  the  pulmonary  arterioles  must  necessarily  cause  a  fall 
of  blood-pressure  on  the  side  of  the  vessel  nearest  to  the  heart,  and 
this  will  serve  to  favor  coagulation  in  an  indirect  method.  Pyro- 
gallic  acid  is  an  internal  astringent  which  has  been  highly  recom- 
mended for  hsemoptysis,  in  doses  of  one  grain  every  half -hour  until 
the  loss  of  blood  ceases,  and  it  is  claimed  for  this  drug  that  it  does 
not  cause  vomiting  nor  produce  dyspepsia  ;  it  has  been  administered 
with  ergot.  Digitalis  and  its  active  principles  have  also  been  used 
in  this  condition,  but  the  benefits  derived  from  them  appear  mostly 
to  be  confined  to  the  period  subsequent  to  the  acute  hsemoptysis  ; 
that  is,  they  are  probably  of  most  value  for  the  weakness  of  the 
circulation  and  the  irregular  cardiac  action  which  may  ensue  for  a 
few  days  after  the  hemorrhage  has  ceased.  Some  observers,  how- 
ever, recommend  that  digitalis  should  be  employed  even  at  the 
onset  of  an  attack  of  hsemoptysis,  and  consider  that  it  is  especially 
useful  when  there  is  much  rise  of  temperature  associated  with  the 
hemorrhage,  and  in  these  circumstances  they  advocate  the  employ- 
ment of  large  doses.  It  has  also  been  urged  that  digitalis  should 
be  used  when  the  action  of  the  heart  is  rapid  and  excited,  but  this 
would  practically  include  nearly  every  case  of  haemoptysis,  inas- 
much as  directly  after  an  attack  the  circulation  is  almost  invariably 
found  to  be  rapid  and  weak,  this  being,  in  some  degree,  the  result 
of  the  loss  of  blood,  though  perhaps  it  may  be  due  to  a  still  greater 
extent  to  the  nervousness  excited  by  this  symptom. 

With  regard  to  the  employment  of  digitalis  in  cases  with  rise  of 
temperature,  this  rise  is  perhaps  most  likely  to  occur  when  the 
hemorrhage  is  not  large  in  amount,  and  it  appears  to  depend  upon 
a  pneumonic  exudation  occurring  in  the  neighborhood  of  a  tuber- 
cular deposit.  The  hsemoptysis  in  these  cases,  however,  differs  but 
little  from  the  expectoration  of  ordinary  cases  of  pneumonia. 

Among  other  remedies  for  hsemoptysis,  which  have  occasionally 
been  employed,  are  those  calculated  to  promote  vomiting  or  nausea  ; 
thus,  for  example,  common  salt,  given  in  the  powdered  form,  or  in 
solution,  has  long  been  a  domestic  remedy,  and  is  even  sometimes 
employed  under  medical  advice.  Ipecacuanha  is  perhaps  more 
certain  in  action,  but,  to  produce  any  beneficial  results,  it  must  be 
given  in  fairly  large  doses,  and  the  depression  which  follows  is  a 


110 


RESPIRATION. 


strong  objection  to  its  employment.  Great  benefit  sometimes 
ensues  from  the  use  of  brisk  purgatives  ;  but  although  a  purgative 
is  of  advantage  in  tending  to  allay  the  expiratory  efforts  so  often 
associated  with  constipation,  this  treatment  cannot  be  repeated  fre- 
quently. Whitla  mentions  having  seen  remarkable  improvement 
from  venesection  in  a  severe  case  of  hsemoptysis,  but  he  admits  that, 
although  he  witnessed  this  treatment  a  quarter  of  a  century  ago,  he 
has  never  had  the  courage  to  try  it  himself. 

The  following  prescriptions  for  various  acute  and  chronic  laryn- 
geal, tracheal,  and  bronchial  affections  are  frequently  employed 
under  different  names  in  several  London  hospitals.  To  save  repeti- 
tion they  are  grouped  together  here  : 


R. — Ammonii  carbonatis 
Vini  ipecacuanhse  . 
Tincturse  senegiae     . 
Aquse  chloroformi  . 

R. — Ammonii  carbonatis 
Spiritus  setheris 
Tincturse  scillse 
Infusi  senegse 

R . — Ammonii  carbonatis 
Spiritus  chloroformi 
Mucilaginis  acaciae 
Aquse 

K . — Ammonii  carbonatis 
Vini  ipecacuanhse  . 
Syrupi  tolutani 
Liquoris  ammonii  acetatis 
Infusi  senegse 

R. — Tincturse  opii  camphoratse 
Vini  ipecacuanhse  . 
Aquse  anethi  . 

R. — Spiritus  chloroformi 

Tincturse  opii  camphoratse 

Syrupi  scillse . 

Aquse     .... 

R. — Vini  ipecacuanhse  . 

Spiritus  setheris  nitrosi  . 
Tincturse  opii  camphoratse 
Liquoris  ammonii  acetatis 
Syrupi  tolutani 
Aquse     .... 


.  gr.  IV. 

.  3ss. 

s.  ad  ^j. 

•  gr-  V. 

.  TTlxv. 

.  ITlxv. 

s.  ad  ^j. 


gr.  IV. 

gr-  iij- 
mviij- 

^ss. 


ad 


ad 


ad 


.      Jss. 
ad     Ij. 

3SS. 

3SS. 
s.  ad     ,^j. 


HEMOPTYSIS. 


Ill 


K .  — Tincturfe.  scillae 

Liquoris  potassse     . 
Succi  conii 
Aquae  camphoi'se     . 
Aquae     .... 

H . — Tincturifi  scillaj 

Tincturse  opii  camphoratse 
Spiritus  setheris  nitrosi  . 
Liquoris  ammonii  acetatis 
AquEe  camphorse     . 
Aquae     .... 

Be. — Potassii  citratis 

Liquoris  ammonii  acetatis 
Tincturse  scillae 
Vini  ipecacuanhse  . 
Aquae  anisi     . 

K. — Spiritus  ammonii  aromatici 
Spiritus  setheris 
Tincturse  aurantii  . 
Aquae  camphorae     . 
Aquae      .... 

R. — Spiritus  aetheris 

Tincturae  lobeliae     . 

Aquae  camphorae 

Aquae     .... 

R. — Vini  ipecacuaahae  . 
Tincturae  scillae 
Spiritus  aetheris  nitrosi   . 
Aquae  chloroformi  . 

R. — Vini  ipecacuanhae  . 
Potassii  nitratis 
Tincturae  opii  camphoratae 
Mucilaginis  acaciae 
Aquae      .... 

R .  — Oxymellis  scillae     . 

Tincturae  opii  camphoratae 
Spiritus  aetheris  nitrosi  . 
Aquae  camphorae     . 
Aquae     .        '  . 

R. — Acidi  sulphurici  diluti    . 
Spiritus  aetheris 
Aceti  scillae    . 
Infusi  senegae 


ad 


ad 


s.  ad 


ad 


ad 


ad 


s.  ad 


s.  ad 


3ss. 

3SS. 
,^ss. 


,^SS. 

3SS. 

3SS. 

3SS. 

,5ss. 
TTlxx. 


112 


RESPIRATION. 


K .  — Creosoti 

Tincturse  opii 
Spiritiis  chloroformi 
Glycerin! 
Aquse     . 

R. — Copaibse 

Spiritus  getheris  nitrosi 
Liquoris  potassse     . 
Aquae  menthse  piperitfe 


ad 


ad 


miij. 

3SS. 


CHAPTER   V. 

EESPIE  ATION—  Continued. 

Pneumonia — Abscess  of  the   Lung — Gangrene   of  the   Lung— Pleurisy — Hydro- 
thorax — Empyema — Pneumothorax — Reflex  Cough. 

Pneumonia.  The  treatment  of  acute  croupous  pneumonia,  or 
lobar  pneumonia,  is  very  largely  dependent  upon  a  variety  of  condi- 
tions. Some  cases  do  well  with  little  or  no  treatment  beyond  rest 
in  bed,  while  others  call  for  the  most  energetic  measures.  The 
principal  conditions  which  call  for  differences  in  treatment  are  : 
1.  The  age  of  the  individual ;  2,  the  severity  of  the  attack  ;  and  3, 
the  particular  type  of  the  disease.  Cases  of  pneumonia  occurring  in 
infancy,  or  in  old  age,  where  the  individual  has  already  perhaps 
been  weakened  by  some  previous  malady,  will  often  call  for  ener- 
getic treatment  which  perhaps  might  scarcely  seem  to  be  needed  if 
the  attention  were  limited  to  the  area  of  lung  affected.  Then  with 
regard  to  the  severity  of  the  attack,  this  may  be  independent  of  the 
extent  of  lung  affected,  since,  in  young  adults,  notwithstanding  a 
very  high  temperature  and  marked  constitutional  symptoms,  the 
urgency  may  pass  away  almost  suddenly  if  only  one  lobe  has  been 
attacked.  But  even  when  only  one  lobe  has  been  affected  by  pneu- 
monia, the  severity  of  the  case  may  be  greatly  increased  by  the 
extent  of  engorgement  of  the  remaining  portion  of  the  lungs. 

The  most  difficult  cases,  however,  to  treat  are  those  of  an  ady- 
namic type,  more  particularly  when  the  pneumonia  appears  to  be  of 
an  infective  variety.  In  these,  the  temperature  is  often  extremely 
irregular,  or  at  all  events  it  does  not  conform  to  the  typical  chart  so 
often  seen  in  the  sthenic  cases  of  young  adults. 

Patients  with  pneumonia  must,  from  the  urgency  of  the  symp- 
toms, be  kept  in  bed  in  a  well-ventilated  room,  and  they  should  be 
protected  from  draughts  by  the  use  of  screens  if  necessary.  As  a 
rule,  however,  it  is  not  advisable  to  employ  steam  tents,  since  these 
patients  require  all  the  oxygen  they  can  obtain.  Owing  to  the  rest- 
lessness and  delirium  which  may  occasionally  be  present,  the  patient 
should  be  warmly  clad  in  flannel  garments,  so  as  to  avoid  exposure 
to  chills. 


114  BESPIBA  TION. 

It  is  well  to  commence  the  treatment  with  saline  purgatives,  but 
these  need  not  be  repeated  unless  there  are  special  indications  for 
their  use.  Mild  saline  diaphoretics  are  often  employed,  but  although 
they  may  seem  to  add  to  the  patient's  comfort,  they  do  not  materi- 
ally affect  the  course  and  duration  of  the  disease.  Frequently  there 
is  much  complaint  of  pain,  which  in  all  probability  depends  upon 
the  pleura,  to  some  extent,  sharing  in  the  inflammation  of  the  lung. 
This  symptom,  if  severe,  should  be  treated  with  poultices  which 
should  encircle  the  affected  side,  but  unless  the  pain  notably  inter- 
feres with  the  patient's  rest  it  is  undesirable  to  employ  poultices. 
Even  when  poultices  are  used  great  care  should  be  taken  not  to 
impede  the  movements  of  respiration,  either  by  weight  or  by  tight 
constriction  ;  hence  nurses  should  be  warned  to  make  the  poultices 
thin  and  light,  and  to  envelop  them  in  an  impervious  covering  so 
as  to  retain  the  heat  as  long  as  possible.  When  there  is  not  much 
evidence  of  fluid  within  the  bronchi,  morphine  may  be  injected  sub- 
cutaneously  for  the  relief  of  pain,  but  this  is  contraindicated  when 
there  is  much  bronchitis  or  secondary  engorgement. 

In  lieu  of  poultices,  fomentations  may  be  used,  and  these  may  be 
sprinkled  with  laudanum  when  pain  is  severe.  It  is,  however, 
necessary  to  remember  that  in  pneumonia,  particularly  in  children, 
the  recovery  of  the  patient  will  often  be  endangered  by  frequent 
disturbance,  and  it  is  therefore  desirable,  when  possible,  to  apply 
fomentations  or  poultices  only  over  the  front  or  side  of  the  thorax. 
For  the  relief  of  pain,  and  also  with  the  object  of  reducing  the 
temperature  and  controlling  inflammation,  cold  has  often  been  ap- 
plied to  the  affected  side.  In  this  way  cold  compresses  have  been 
used,  or  india-rubber  bags  of  large  size,  containing  pounded  ice, 
have  been  tied  to  the  thorax.  When  this  treatment  is  adopted,  it 
is  desirable  to  watch  for  signs  of  collapse,  and  any  blueness  of  the 
lips  or  rapid  fall  of  temperature  should  immediately  be  met  by 
removing  the  ice  bag  and  by  the  administration  of  stimulants. 
Such  symptoms  of  collapse  are  most  prone  to  occur  when  the  ice 
bag  has  been  applied  over  the  pericardium.  I  have  no  doubt  that, 
in  many  cases  under  my  treatment,  good  results  have  followed  from 
the  use  of  the  ice  bag  ;  but  it  is  a  form  of  treatment  which  is  perhaps 
best  effected  in  hospital  practice,  owing  to  the  fears  so  commonly 
expressed  of  the  risks  of  cold.  In  less  severe  cases,  pain  may  be 
relieved  by  the  use  of  leeches  over  the  affected  area,  and  these  may 
be  followed  by  the  application  of  poultices.     Some  practitioners  are 


PNEUMONIA.  115 

in  favor  of  the  use  of  blisters,  or  of  dry  cupping  tlie  affected  side, 
but  these  measures,  more  particularly  the  former,  render  subsequent 
local  treatment  somewhat  difficult,  and  do  not, 'in  my  experience, 
appear  to  be  necessary. 

At  one  time  it  was  a  common  practice  to  employ  antipyretics 
in  the  treatment  of  pneumonia,  and  nearly  all  the  new  antipy- 
retics, such  as  antifebrin,  antipyrin,  and  the  like  have  been  tried 
in  turn  ;  while  other  remedies,  such  as  quinine  and  cocaine,  have 
been  used  with  the  idea  either  of  reducing  the  temperature  or 
of  controlling  inflammation.  In  most  cases  of  pneumonia  such 
remedies  are  not  only  needless  but  distinctly  harmful.  The  anti- 
pyretics of  the  aniline  series  are  more  particularly  objectionable, 
since  they  frequently  cause  some  degree  of  cardiac  depression, 
and  also,  to  a  certain  extent,  interfere  with  the  proper  oxygenation 
of  the  blood.  Moreover,  in  mild  cases  of  pneumonia  there  can  be 
no  doubt  that  these  antipyretics  do  not  reduce  the  temperature 
unless  they  are  employed  in  large  doses,  and  even  when  so  given, 
although  they  may  cause  some  fall  of  temperature,  they  do  not 
appear  to  curtail  the  duration  of  the  fever. 

When  the  temperature  has  reached  104°  or  more,  however,  there 
can  be  no  harm  in  lowering  the  temperature  by  mild  measures  in 
the  same  way  as  in  the  treatment  of  typhoid  fever.  The  frequent 
sponging  of  the  surface  of  the  body  with  tepid  or  cold  water  will 
serve  to  lower  the  temperature  and  to  increase  the  patient's  comfort. 
It  is  rarely  necessary,  however,  to  employ  ice-cold  water,  and  still 
more  rarely  is  it  desirable  to  use  a  cold  bath.  In  cases  of  extreme 
hyperpyrexia  such  treatment  may  be  resorted  to  when  the  fever  has 
resisted  other  measures,  but  in  using  the  cold  bath  the  risk  of  de- 
pression must  be  borne  in  mind,  and  small  doses  of  stimulants 
should  be  given  both  before  and  after  the  bath. 

When  cases  of  pneumonia  are  uncomplicated  and  occur  in  young 
adults,  medicines  may  be  unnecessary  during  the  earlier  stages,  since 
consolidation  cannot  be  hastened  by  the  administration  of  drugs.  It 
is  very  customary,  although  perhaps  not  essential,  to  administer 
mild  salines  as  long  as  the  temperature  remains  high.  Moderate 
doses  of  the  liquor  ammonii  acetatis,  together  with  a  little  ammo- 
nium carbonate,  will  often  satisfy  the  desire  of  the  patient  and  his 
friends  for  some  medication.  Later,  however,  when  the  expectora- 
tion is  becoming  more  free,  its  removal  may  be  facilitated  by  treat- 
ment similar  to  that  employed  in  cases  of  acute  bronchitis,  namely. 


116  RESPIRATION. 

the  administration  of  ammonium  carbonate  Avith  ipecacuanha,  or 
with  antimony  and  potassium  tartrate.  Children  bear  ipecacuanha 
well,  as  a  rule,  but  sometimes  it  appears  to  favor  a  tendency  to  diar- 
rhoea, and  its  administration  should  then  be  discontinued.  Later, 
when  the  expectoration  has  lost  its  viscid  character  and  has  become 
loose,  and  more  freely  expelled,  benefit  will  result  from  the  admin- 
istration of  tonics  of  an  acid  character.  Small  doses  of  quinine, 
given  with  dilute  sulphuric  acid,  and  perhaps  with  ferric  chloride^ 
will  hasten  convalescence,  or  quinine  may  be  given  in  an  effer- 
vescing form  with  citric  acid  and  one  of  the  alkaline  carbonates. 
Benefit  will  also  frequently  be  found  to  result  from  the  use  of  nux 
vomica,  or  of  strychnine,  which  may  be  given  with  the  acid  quinine 
mixture  above  mentioned. 

Soderberg  {Jahrh.  /.  Kinderheilk.,  xlviii.  p.  365)  strongly  re- 
commends pilocarpine  in  the  treatment  of  acute  pneumonia.  He 
reports  ten  cases  of  acute  pneumonia,  six  of  them  in  children,  treated 
with  this  drug ;  all  recovered,  and  the  duration  of  the  disease  was 
considerably  reduced  (from  seven  or  eleven  days  to  twenty-four  or 
sixty  hours).  In  acute  pneumonia  the  symptoms  became  very  much 
milder  after  the  first  dose  of  pilocarpine,  and  the  pain  disappeared 
in  a  few  hours.  Perspiration  and  salivation  were  marked,  but  no 
disquieting  symptoms  of  collapse  were  observed,  so  that  he  con- 
siders the  treatment  to  be  free  from  danger.  He  gave  the  drug 
internally  in  watery  solution,  and  in  some  cases  administered  at  the 
same  time  alcohol^  digitalis,  or  strophanthus,  when  these  drugs 
appeared  to  be  necessary.  Schlesinger  (ibid.)  found  the  mortality 
of  173  children  treated  in  the  Kaiser  und  Kaiserin  Friedrich  Chil- 
dren's Hospital,  in  Berlin,  to  be  only  4  per  cent.  The  treatment 
which  gave  the  best  results  when  the  temperature  was  high  Avas  the 
moderate  and  careful  use  of  the  cold  pack.  The  cautious  adminis- 
tration of  stimulants,  especially  alcohol,  was  also  looked  upon  as 
important. 

Of  the  special  symptoms  which  may  call  for  separate  treatment  in 
the  course  of  pneumonia  the  most  important  perhaps  are  those  con- 
nected with  cardiac  failure.  These  symptoms  may  arise  quite  early, 
and  they  are  indications  for  the  use  of  stimulants.  Many  practi- 
tioners are  in  the  habit  of  employing  stimulants  throughout  the 
course  of  pneumonia,  or  at  least  during  the  time  that  the  temper- 
ature is  high.  I  am  convinced,  however,  that  in  many  cases  this 
routine  treatment  is  quite  unnecessary,  and  that  it  is  better  to  defer 


PNEUMONIA.  117 

the  use  of  stimulants  until  they  are  specially  indicated  by  the  nature 
of  the  pulse.  Then  the  amount  to  be  given  within  the  twenty-four 
hours  must  be  determined  by  the  degree  of  urgency  of  the  case  ;  for 
adults  6  oz.,  10  oz.,  or  12  oz.  of  brandy  or  whiskey  may  be  given 
in  the  twenty-four  hours  in  small  divided  doses,  but  the  lavish  em- 
ployment of  stimulants  as  a  mere  matter  of  routine  is  distinctly  to 
be  deprecated. 

For  the  same  class  of  symptoms  cardiac  tonics  have  been  em- 
ployed, and  of  these  digitalis  and  strophanthus  are  most  commonly 
used,  and  sometimes  advantage  results  from  the  addition  of  strych- 
nine to  the  above  drugs,  or  from  the  hypodermatic  injection  of 
strychnine,  the  latter  plan  being  most  beneficial  when  the  symptoms 
of  cardiac  failure  are  extremely  urgent.  In  using  digitalis  for 
heart-failure  in  pneumonia,  it  is  necessary  to  remember  that  com- 
paratively large  doses  may  be  required  so  long  as  the  temperature  is 
high,  but  that  these  doses  require  reduction  so  soon  as  there  is  any 
marked  fall  of  temperature,  since  large  doses,  which  can  be  tolerated 
during  fever,  may  cause  toxic  symptoms  when  the  temperature  is 
nearly  normal. 

In  severe  cases,  where  a  large  portion  of  the  lung  has  become  in- 
volved either  with  pneumonia  or  with  great  engorgement,  urgent 
dyspnoea  may  be  present,  and  the  treatment  of  this  symptom  requires 
much  circumspection.  If  due  to  overloading  of  the  bronchi,  or  of 
the  air  cells,  relief  may  be  given  by  the  employment  of  an  emetic, 
or  by  the  use  of  stimulant  expectorants.  But  sometimes,  in  plethoric 
individuals,  dyspnoea  appears  to  result  from  embarrassment  of  the 
circulation  and  over-dilatation  of  the  rig^ht  side  of  the  heart.  Under 
such  circumstances,  it  is  desirable  to  bleed  fairly  freely  from  the 
arm,  the  relief  thus  afforded  being  sometimes  very  noticeable. 
When,  however,  the  strength  of  the  patient  does  not  seem  to  allow 
of  the  employment  of  venesection,  inhalations  of  oxygen  may  be 
extremely  valuable,  and  may  serve  to  tide  over  the  time  of  danger, 
Avhich  is  generally  limited  to  the  period  of  high  temperature.  Small 
doses  of  strychnine,  given  hypodermatically,  may  also  be  employed 
with  urgent  dyspnoea,  more  particularly  when  there  appears  to  be 
reason  to  suppose  that  the  dyspnoea  is  dependent  upon  cardiac 
weakness  and  embarrassment,  rather  than  upon  lung  obstruction. 
Should  the  dyspnoea  arise  comparatively  suddenly,  without  any 
marked  increase  in  the  extent  of  the  physical  signs,  there  may  be 
grounds  for  believing  that  it  is  due  to  nerve  influence,  and  on  this 


118  RESPIRATION. 

hypothesis  it  may  be  treated  with  small  closes  of  ethei'  and  of  mor- 
phine, administered  bj  the  mouth,  or  morphine  may  be  given  sub- 
cutaneously.  The  hypodermatic  injection  of  morphine,  however, 
requires  great  care,  since  no  treatment  can  be  less  desirable  if  the 
dyspnoea  is  after  all  dependent  upon  obstruction  of  free  entrance  of 
air  to  the  air  cells. 

Mention  has  already  been  made  of  the  use  of  salines  and  expector- 
ants in  the  treatment  of  pneumonia.  In  spite  of  these,  however, 
the  cough  sometimes  becomes  so  troublesome  as  to  require  further 
treatment  calculated  to  lessen  the  expectoration  and  to  facilitate  its 
removal.  It  must  be  remembered  that  as  a  rule  in  pneumonia  some 
degree  of  cough  is  a  necessity,  and  although  some  patients,  particu- 
larly children,  may  go  through  marked  attacks  of  pneumonia  with 
little  or  no  cough  and  with  no  expectoration,  yet,  in  the  vast 
majority  of  cases  of  adults,  the  dulness  over  the  affected  area  of 
lung  is  diminished  only  as  the  expectoration  is  removed  by  the  act 
of  coughing.  Remedies  must  therefore  be  used,  not  to  suppress 
cough,  or  to  diminish  the  reflex  excitability  of  the  larynx,  but  to 
favor  the  removal  of  expectoration,  and  in  this  way  to  render  expir- 
atory efforts  less  frequent  and  less  painful.  These  indications  can 
be  followed  by  the  administration  of  fairly  large  doses  of  warm 
alkaline  draughts.  Alkaline  sprays  of  ammonium  chloride  or  of 
sodium  bicarbonate  will  also  sometimes  facilitate  the  expectoration 
of  viscid  sputum.  When  sleep  is  disturbed  by  frequent  cough,  small 
doses  of  powder  of  ipecacuanha  and  opium  may  be  given,  or  anti- 
mony and  potassium  tartrate  may  be  added.  The  sleeplessness  of 
pneumonia  is  perhaps  best  treated  with  small  doses  of  chloral 
hydrate,  but  benefit  often  results  from  the  simultaneous  use  of  small 
quantities  of  stimulants,  which  counteract  the  depressing  influence 
of  chloral  hydrate  on  the  circulation. 

Another  complication,  which  occasionally  calls  for  special  treat- 
ment, is  due  to  intestinal  irritation.  This  condition,  recognized  by. 
diarrhoea,  is  most  prone  to  occur  after  the  crisis,  and  it  is  perhaps 
most  commonly  seen  in  pneumonia  in  children.  To  some  extent 
it  appears  to  result  from  eliminative  efforts,  and  therefore  when  it 
lasts  only  for  a  short  time  the  symptom  may  be  disregarded.  When 
it  occurs  early,  it  may  be  the  result  of  injudicious  diet,  or  it  may 
follow  the  employment  of  ipecacuanha  in  overdoses.  Any  error 
in  diet  or  in  the  employment  of  remedies  should  be  corrected,  and 
if  the  diarrhoea  continues,  it  may  be  necessary  to  administer  astrin- 


PNEUMONIA.  119 

gents,  and  perhaps  opium,  if  the  age  of  the  patient  permits.  The 
emj)loyment  of  opium  is,  however,  contraindicatecl  both  in  infancy 
and  in  the  diarrhoea  which  sometimes  complicates  the  pneumonia  of 
old  people.  If  there  is  any  reason  to  believe  that  the  diarrhoea  is 
due  to  errors  of  diet,  moderate  doses  of  calomel,  of  gray  powder,  or 
of  blue  pill  may  be  given,  followed  by  a  saline  aperient.  Should  the 
diarrhoea  be  complicated  by  sickness,  the  diet  should  be  restricted 
to  milk,  which  may  with  advantage  be  diluted  with  any  alkaline 
water. 

In  individuals  with  an  alcoholic  history,  it  is  not  uncommon  for 
pneumonia  to  pursue  a  special  course  of  an  adynamic  type,  marked 
by  low  temperature,  and  by  cerebral  symptoms  simulating  those  of 
delirium  tremens.  In  these  cases  sleeplessness  is  commonly  a 
marked  feature,  and  the  patient  has  almost  to  be  treated  on  the 
principles  suitable  for  delirium  tremens.  Stimulants  should  be 
given  frequently  in  small  doses,  and  cardiac  tonics,  such  as  digitalis 
and  strophanthus,  are  required.  Chloral  hydrate  will  occasionally 
enable  the  patient  to  obtain  sleep,  or  will  at  least  check  the  con- 
tinuance of  the  restless  movements  and  mental  excitement.  Since 
many  of  these  cases  of  delirium  occur  amongst  individuals  of  alco- 
holic habit,  they  are  frequently  complicated  by  the  existence  of 
renal  troubles  and  weakness  of  the  left  ventricle,  and  on  this  account 
opium  is  contraindicated. 

In  uncomplicated  cases  convalescence  usually  proceeds  without 
interruption  and  is  fairly  rapid,  but  it  may  be  hastened  by  the  use 
of  tonic  measures,  such  as  those  already  mentioned,  namely,  the 
administration  of  iron,  of  quinine,  and  of  strychnine.  As  the  patient 
gains  strength,  the  diet  should  be  rendered  more  generous  and 
nutritious,  and  he  should  be  encouraged  to  get  daily  exercise  in 
suitable  weather.  Frequently  the  patient  appears  to  be  well,  so 
far  as  his  sensations  and  general  symptoms  are  concerned,  long 
before  the  physical  signs  have  completely  cleared  up.  Some  dul- 
ness  may  remain  over  the  affected  lung  for  a  lengthened  period, 
and  fine  crepitations  may  be  heard  over  this  site,  even  when  the 
cough  has  completely  ceased.  These  conditions  are  to  be  treated 
by  the  application  of  counter-irritants  over  the  thorax.  Iodine  may 
be  painted  over  the  site  of  the  dulness,  the  whole  area  either  being 
covered  with  two  or  three  successive  applications,  or,  preferably; 
small  portions  of  the  chest  may  be  treated  on  successive  days.  Even 
when  the  dulness  persists,  this  affords  no  contraindication  against 


120  BESPIBA  TION. 

change  of  air,  and  great  benefit  is  commonly  experienced  from  resi- 
dence at  the  seaside,  or,  if  the  patient  is  a  good  sailor,  from  a  short 
sea  trip.  When,  however,  the  dnlness  is  associated  with  continu- 
ance of  cough  and  with  much  expectoration,  a  more  supporting 
form  of  treatment  is  required.  These  conditions  may  arise  in  elderly 
people,  and  they  call  for  the  administration  of  stimulants  and  for 
the  employment  of  tonics.  When,  however,  they  are  associated  with 
an  oscillating  temperature,  and  when  they  occur  in  young  adults,  it 
may  be  feared  that  phthisical  changes  are  supervening,  the  prob- 
ability being  as  a  rule  increased  if  to  these  symptoms  night-sweats 
are  superadded.  Under  these  circumstances,  benefit  is  sometimes 
found  to  result  from  the  administration  of  cod-liver  oil,  and  of 
ferrous  iodide,  or  phosphate,  each  of  which  may  be  conveniently 
given  in  the  form  of  a  syrup. 

Abscess  of  the  Lung.  Abscess  of  the  lung  is,  happily,  not  a 
condition  which  frequently  arises,  although  it  may  occur  subse- 
quently to  an  attack  of  pneumonia,  or  in  connection  with  general 
pyaemia.  The  most  important  element  in  the  diagnosis  lies  in  the 
altered  character  of  the  expectoration,  and  in  the  presence  of  frag- 
ments of  elastic  tissue.  Pysemic  or  embolic  cases  are  often  over- 
looked, and  the  uncertainty  of  the  diagnosis  almost  precludes  any 
special  line  of  treatment ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  with  pneumonic 
cases  the  mode  of  treatment  will  depend  upon  the  estimate  formed 
of  the  size  of  the  abscess,  and  upon  its  position.  If  only  a  small 
portion  of  the  lung  is  involved,  the  case  should  be  treated  by 
hygienic  measures,  which  are  mainly  to  be  directed  toward  improv- 
ing the  general  health  of  the  patient,  and  facilitating  the  expector- 
ation of  pus.  A  change  of  air  is,  therefore,  often  indicated  ;  and 
the  use  of  inhalations  with  turpentine,  or  other  volatile  correctives, 
may  be  beneficial ;  at  the  same  time,  the  diet  must  be  generous, 
provided  that  the  temperature  is  not  continuously  high.  Frequently, 
in  these  cases,  the  temperature  oscillates,  but  it  may,  to  some  extent, 
be  rendered  more  steady  by  the  administration  of  quinine.  When, 
however,  it  is  thought  that  an  abscess  in  the  lung  is  of  large  size,  and 
the  patient  is  being  exhausted  by  the  continuous  formation  of  pus, 
the  question  of  surgical  interference  must  arise.  Several  cases  have 
now  been  recorded  in  which  abscess  of  the  lung  has  been  successfully 
dealt  with  [Lancet,  August  22,  1896).  In  the  performance  of  the 
operation  it  is  advisable  to  proceed  somewhat  as  in  the  treatment  of 
empyema,  that  is  to  say,  an  opening  should  be  made  by  removing  a 


GANGRENE  OF  THE  LUNG.  121 

portion  of  one  or  more  ribs  over  the  affected  area.  If  the  parietal 
and  visceral  layers  of  the  pleura  are  adherent,  an  incision  may  be 
made  directly  into  the  lung  beneath ;  but  when  they  appear  to  be 
distinct,  it  is  advisable  to  expose  only  a  small  portion  of  the  lung, 
and  to  surround  the  part  thus  exposed  with  iodoform  gauze.  The 
incision  through  the  lung  may  be  best  made  by  means  of  the 
thermo-cautery,  which  diminishes  the  risks  of  hemorrhage.  After 
the  cavity  has  been  reached  and  evacuated,  it  may  be  scraped  dry 
and  frequently  steeped  with  iodoform  gauze.  In  speaking  of  one 
of  the  cases  thus  treated,  Mr.  Treves  stated  that  it  is  evident  lung 
abscesses  can  be  treated  precisely  in  the  same  manner  as  suppur- 
ative collections  in  more  accessible  parts,  and  that  an  extensive  in- 
cision can  be  made  in  the  periphery  of  the  lung  without  trouble 
from  hemorrhage. 

Although  this  treatment  has  been  recommended  in  severe  cases, 
abscess  of  the  lung  has  sometimes  been  dealt  with  by  aspiration,  and 
by  the  injection  of  antiseptic  solutions  into  the  abscess  cavity.  The 
antiseptics  which  have  been  employed  are  carbolic  acid,  corrosive 
mercuric  chloride,  and  creosote,  but  these  measures  rarely  lead  to 
satisfactory  results,  and  there  is  always  some  danger  of  absorption  of 
the  antiseptic  from  the  wall  of  the  cavity.  Efforts  have  sometimes 
been  made  to  treat  these  cases  by  the  internal  administration  of 
antiseptics,  creosote  being  perhaps  the  one  which  has  been  used  with 
the  greatest  amount  of  hope  ;  but  this  treatment  is,  I  consider,  only 
applicable  when  there  are  reasonable  grounds  for  uncertainty  as  to 
the  diagnosis.  When  the  abscess  has  been  diagnosed  with  certainty, 
it  is,  I  consider,  better  to  deal  with  it  by  surgical  measures. 

Gangrene  of  the  Lung.  Gangrene  of  the  lung  occurs  under 
somewhat  the  same  conditions  as  abscess,  but,  in  addition,  it  may 
arise  in  consequence  of  the  irritation  of  the  contents  of  a  cavity,  due 
either  to  bronchitis  or  to  tuberculosis.  It  may  also  result  from 
embolism  of  a  branch  of  the  pulmonary  artery.  It  is  characterized 
by  intense  fetor  of  the  expectoration,  which  is  far  worse  than  that 
connected  with  abscess.  The  diagnosis  rests  almost  entirely  upon 
this  condition  of  the  expectoration,  though  there  may  be  physical 
signs  of  a  cavity,  which  may  serve  to  localize  the  gangrenous  area. 
If  the  position  of  this  cavity  can  be  established,  surgical  measures, 
similar  to  those  already  described  in  connection  with  abscess  of  the 
lung,  may  be  adopted.  In  the  majority  of  cases,  however,  treat- 
ment is  almost  entirely  limited  to  the  disinfection  of  the  gangrenous 


1 22  BE8PIBA  TION. 

area,  which  may  be  effected  by  the  use  of  sprays  or  inhalations. 
When  it  can  be  tolerated,  an  inhalation  of  chlorine  or  of  iodine  has 
often  proved  beneficial,  but  these  drugs  frequently  produce  so  much 
irritation  and  cough  that  they  have  to  be  discontinued.  Carbolic 
acid  and  creosote  are  often  employed  in  sprays  of  the  strength  of 
1  drachm  in  10  ounces,  while  for  the  purpose  of  inhalation  eucalyp- 
tus and  menthol  are  frequently  of  service.  Turpentine  inhalations 
will  often  serve  to  correct  the  fetor  and  to  reduce  the  amoant  of 
expectoration,  while  the  surroundings  of  the  patient  are  often 
rendered  more  tolerable  by  the  impregnation  of  the  atmosphere 
with  vapor  arising  from  turpentine,  from  eucalyptus,  or  other  vola- 
tile antiseptics,  which  may  either  be  employed  as  a  spray  about  the 
room,  or  may  be  sprinkled  upon  tow,  or  gauze,  in  the  neighborhood 
of  the  patient. 

The  penetrating  odor  of  the  expectoration  may  also  be  corrected 
by  the  use  of  turpentine,  sanitas,  sulphurous  acid,  or  chlorinated 
lime.  Bromine  has  been  mentioned  in  this  connection,  but  the 
characteristic  odor  is  little  better  than  that  of  the  gangrenous  ex- 
pectoration. Care  is  taken  promptly  to  disinfect  and  to  deodorize 
the  expectoration.  It  should  be  received  in  a  vessel  which  contains 
chlorinated  lime,  Condy's  fluid^  or  turpentine,  and  should  be  re- 
moved at  short  intervals. 

For  internal  use,  it  is  advisable  to  employ  volatile  antiseptics,  such 
as  creosote  or  guaiacol.  The  former  may  be  given  satisfactorily  in 
the  form  of  capsules,  the  latter  as  a  carbonate  in  cachets.  Oil  of 
eucalyptus,  or  oil  of  peppermint,  has  also  been  administered  inter- 
nally, and  turpentine  in  moderate  dose  is  frequently  given.  It  must 
be  admitted  that  most  of  these  remedies  are  employed  chiefi.y  on 
theoretical  grounds,  and  that  the  fetor  of  the  expectoration  is  but 
little  affected  by  the  internal  administration  of  these  volatile  anti- 
septics. For  the  correction  of  fetor  by  the  internal  use  of  these 
remedies,  or  by  the  internal  administration  of  carbolic  acid,  the 
doses  which  would  be  required  are  larger  than  could  be  employed 
with  safety  for  any  length  of  time. 

Tonics  should  be  employed  freely  in  this  condition,  the  diet 
should  be  generous,  and  stimulants  may  be  required,  since  gangrene 
of  the  lung  almost  invariably  leads  to  great  anorexia  and  rapid  loss 
of  strength. 

Pleurisy.  The  treatment  of  pleurisy  depends  upon  two  factors  : 
the  degree  of  pain  and  the  extent  of  effusion.  The  onset  of  all  forms 


PLEURISY.  123 

of  pleurisy  is  commonly  marked  by  pain,  but  some  cases  are  not 
attended  by  much  effusion,  while  in  others  the  effusion  scarcely  calls 
for  treatment,  the  treatment  of  effusion  being  essentially  dependent 
upon  the  estimate  formed  of  its  amount.  With  cases  unattended 
by  effusion,  that  is,  with  dry  pleurisy,  the  pain  is  best  treated  by 
the  application  of  a  few  leeches  over  the  painful  site,  the  patient 
necessarily  being  confined  to  bed  in  a  room  of  an  even  temperature. 
After  the  application  of  leeches  further  relief  may  be  given  by  the 
use  of  compresses,  fomentations,  or  poultices,  and  sometimes  these 
may  alone  be  relied  upon  if  the  pain  is  not  excessive.  Benefit  often 
results  from  the  limitation  of  the  movements  of  the  chest  either  by 
broad  strips  of  plaster  over  the  affected  side,  or  by  the  application 
of  a  bandage  which  renders  the  respiration  more  purely  diaphrag- 
matic. The  local  use  of  cold,  either  by  applying  an  ice  bag,  or  by 
Leiter's  tubes,  will  also  diminish  discomfort,  but  there  is  still  much 
popular  prejudice  against  the  employment  of  cold,  notwithstanding 
its  undoubted  efficacy  ;  it  is  therefore  sometimes  difficult  to  carry 
out  this  form  of  treatment. 

Pain  is  also  to  be  controlled  by  the  use  of  preparations  of  opium 
or  by  the  use  of  morphine,  which  may  be  given  by  the  mouth  or 
may  be  injected  subcutaneously  over  the  painful  spot.  For  internal 
treatment  salines  may  be  given,  and  these  will  frequently  diminish 
the  risks  of  effusion.  When  the  pleurisy  is  somewhat  chronic,  as, 
for  example,  in  cases  of  phthisis,  it  is  often  unnecessary  to  keep  the 
patient  in  bed,  and  some  measure  of  relief  may  be  afforded  by 
counter-irritation  over  the  painful  site  by  painting  repeatedly  with 
dilute  solutions  of  iodine  until  the  skin  shows  signs  of  cracking.  It 
must  be  remembered  that  dry  pleurisy  is  frequently  symptomatic  of 
some  more  general  disease,  and  that  many  of  the  measures  above 
mentioned  are  purely  palliative. 

The  treatment  of  pleurisy  with  effusion  is,  as  above  indicated, 
dependent  upon  the  extent  of  the  diffusion  and  upon  the  degree  in 
which  respiration  is  interfered  with  by  compression  of  lung  sub- 
stance. The  pain  which  marks  the  early  stages  speedily  diminishes 
with  the  accumulation  of  fluid,  but  it  calls  for  the  adoption  of 
similar  measures  to  those  which  have  been  already  mentioned  for 
the  relief  of  pain  in  connection  with  dry  pleurisy.  Opium  may  be 
given  internally,  or  morphine  may  be  injected  subcutaneously  over 
the  painful  area,  the  injection  being  repeated  from  time  to  time  if 
necessary.     Poultices  or  spongiopiline  may  be  used,  and  so  far  the 


124  RESPIRATION. 

treatment  does  not  materially  differ  from  that  of  dry  pleurisy. 
Other  remedies,  however,  may  be  called  for  ;  thus,  for  example,  in 
rare  cases  it  may  be  desirable  to  employ  antipyretics.  Generally, 
however,  the  rise  of  temperature  is  but  moderate  and  scarcely 
necessitates  treatment. 

Sodium  salicylate  or  other  alkaline  salts  may  be  used,  and  fre- 
quently serve  to  reduce  discomfort.  In  this  affection  they  fre- 
quently act  as  powerful  diuretics  : 

K .  — Sodii  salicylatis gr-  v- 

Sodii  citratis  .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .  gr.  v. 

Sodii  acetatis  .         .         .         .         .         .         .  gr.  v. 

Aqua  menthfe  piperitfe   .  .  .  .       q.  s.  ad  ^ss. 

M.  ft.  dosis.     Sig. — One  tablespoonfal  every  two  to  four  hours. 

The  group  of  saline  purgatives  is  often  indicated  when  the  effu- 
sion is  increasing  slowly  or  when  it  remains  fairly  stationary. 
Indeed,  under  any  circumstances  a  saline  purgative  may  be  followed 
by  speedy  diminution  of  the  area  of  dulness.  With  the  same  object, 
calomel  is  often  administered  in  moderate  doses,  and  further  efforts 
to  reduce  effusion  may  be  made  by  the  use  of  other  diuretic  reme- 
dies ;  in  fact,  it  is  often  found  that  the  removal  of  fluid  from  the 
bloodvessels  either  by  the  kidney  or  by  the  bowel  is  followed  by 
re-absorption  of  the  fluid  which  has  been  poured  out  into  the  pleural 
cavity.  When  the  fluid  shows  but  little  sign  of  alteration  in 
amount,  absorption  may  be  promoted  by  the  application  of  iodine 
to  the  surface  or  by  dry  cupping  over  the  lower  part  of  the  chest, 
and  if  these  measures  fail,  benefit  will  sometimes  follow  the  use  of 
small  flying  blisters. 

When  there  is  much  complaint  of  cough  producing  pain,  and  when 
there  is  but  little  expectoration,  the  continuous  use  of  narcotics  is 
indicated,  and  for  the  production  of  sleep  chloral  hydrate,  the 
bromides,  and  sulphonal  are  to  be  preferred.  When  the  effusion 
has  increased  in  amount  its  absorption  is  often  favored  by  the 
aspiration  of  a  small  quantity  of  fluid.  The  removal  even  of  a  few 
ounces  will  often  be  followed  by  rapid  reabsorption.  It  is  fre- 
quently found,  however,  that  this  reabsorption  is  only  partial,  and 
that  at  the  base  of  the  lung  on  the  affected  side  some  degree  of  dul- 
ness may  remain  with  but  little  variation,  the  patient  experiencing 
very  slight  discomfort,  indicated  only  perhaps  by  a  slightly  in- 
creased rate  of  respiration.     Under  these  circumstances  it  is  often 


PLEURISY.  125 

advisable  to  allow  the  patient  to  get  up  and  to  take  exercise  in  the 
open  air ;  should  the  case  still  prove  refractory,  complete  recovery 
may  be  hastened  by  a  change  of  air  to  the  seaside,  remembering, 
however,  that  it  is  necessary  strictly  to  enjoin  the  avoidance  of 
chills  and  undue  exposure. 

With  regard  to  the  fairly  numerous  cases  in  which  the  amount  of 
effusion  is  sufficient  seriously  to  affect  the  respiration,  these  require 
more  energetic  measures.  When  the  respiration  becomes  unduly 
rapid  and  the  circulation  is  embarrassed,  and  especially  when  there 
is  any  indication  of  cyanosis,  it  is  advisable  to  perform  paracentesis 
early,  since,  independent  of  the  immediate  dangers  to  respiration 
and  circulation,  there  are  risks  of  undue  compression  of  the  lung 
and  of  the  formation  of  fibrinous  adhesions  which  may  prevent  its 
expansion.  In  recommending  early  paracentesis,  however,  it  is 
necessary  to  remember  that  the  thoracic  cavity  should  not  be  com- 
pletely drained  and  that  the  fluid  should  be  removed  comparatively 
slowly,  since  otherwise  there  is  risk  of  provoking  cough  of  a  dis- 
tressing character  and  also  of  unduly  disturbing  the  balance  of  the 
circulation  through  the  lung. 

Before  performing  paracentesis,  it  is  advisable  to  ascertain  the 
nature  of  the  fluid  within  the  pleural  cavity,  and  this  may  be  effected 
by  withdrawing  a  small  quantity  with  an  aspirating  needle.  This 
minor  preliminary  operation  is  especially  desirable  in  cases  marked 
either  by  high  temperature,  or  by  great  fluctuations  of  temperature, 
more  particularly  when  the  effusion  follows  or  accompanies  one  of 
the  exanthemata,  or  when  it  occurs  as  a  complication  in  the  course 
of  nephritis,  either  acute  or  chronic.  If  the  fluid  removed  under 
these  circumstances  is  found  to  be  clear  and  there  is  but  little  inter- 
ference with  respiration  and  circulation,  paracentesis  may  be  post- 
poned ;  on  the  other  hand,  if  the  fluid  is  found  to  be  purulent  the 
case  must  be  treated  as  one  of  empyema.  When,  however,  the  fluid 
is  only  moderately  turbid  or  opaque,  early  paracentesis  is  generally 
advisable,  since  under  such  circumstances  flakes  of  lymph  are  readily 
formed  and  may  be  deposited  upon  the  surface  of  the  lung  and 
interfere  with  its  proper  expansion. 

The  fluid  may  be  removed  by  means  of  an  aspirator  such  as  that 
of  Dieulafoy  or  Potain,  but  many  instrument-makers  supply  ex- 
cellent aspirators  fitted  with  two-way  stopcocks  which  are  extremely 
convenient.  The  trocar  employed  should  be  small  and  should  permit 
the  use  of  a  blunt  stylet  to  clear  the  orifice  of  flaky  lymph,  and  the 


126  BESPIRA  TION. 

whole  operation  should  proceed  very  slowly ;  even  when  the 
thoracic  cavity  seems  to  be  fully  distended  with  liquid,  only  some 
fifty  ounces  at  most  should  be  withdrawn.  In  performing  this  oper- 
ation it  is  advisable  to  ausesthetize  the  skin  either  with  strong  car- 
bolic acid,  or  with  cocaine,  or  with  ethyl  chloride.  Frequently, 
however,  these  local  anaesthetics  cause  almost  as  much  pain  as  that 
produced  by  the  introduction  of  the  trocar,  and  when  the  skin  is 
very  thick  or  tough,  a  small  incision  made  quickly  will  facilitate 
the  introduction  of  the  trocar  and  produce  almost  as  little  pain  as 
the  introduction  of  the  hypodermatic  needle. 

It  is  necessary,  before  performing  paracentesis,  to  render  the 
instruments  and  the  skin  thoroughly  aseptic,  and  it  is  always  ad- 
visable, however  frequently  the  instruments  may  have  been  used, 
to  test  their  working  power  before  introducing  the  trocar.  The 
need  for  caution  during  removal  of  fluid  is  further  emphasized  by 
the  risk  of  damaging  the  lung  during  any  violent  efforts  of  cough- 
ing, as  well  as  by  the  danger  of  allowing  small  quantities  of  air  to 
be  introduced  into  the  pleural  cavity  during  spasmodic  efforts.  The 
site  of  puncture  is  usually  somewhat  arbitrarily  decided  upon,  and 
since  the  object  is  to  remove  fluid  and  to  relieve  pressure  without 
emptying  the  pleural  cavity,  the  site  selected  is  ordinarily  that 
which  is  most  favorable  to  the  introduction  of  the  trocar,  namely, 
the  fifth  or  the  sixth  interspace  in  the  posterior  axillary  line. 

Instead  of  employing  an  aspirator,  some  physicians  are  in  favor 
of  the  use  of  Southey's  tubes  with  a  long  drainage  tube  passing  into 
a  vessel  under  the  bed,  the  lower  end  of  the  tube  being  under  water. 
During  the  removal  of  the  trocar  it  is  advisable  to  press  the  skin 
closely  so  as  to  prevent  the  entrance  of  air  into  the  chest,  and  to 
apply  at  once  over  the  site  of  the  opening  a  small  pad  of  lint  dipped 
in  collodion,  which  may  in  turn  be  covered  with  a  small  piece  of 
gauze,  over  which  collodion  may  be  freely  applied  ;  or  since  the 
application  of  collodion  to  a  raw  surface  frequently  causes  consider- 
able pain,  a  small  quantity  of  aseptic  cotton-wool  may  be  placed 
over  the  opening,  and  this  in  turn  covered  with  gauze,  which  is 
rendered  adherent  with  collodion  freely  painted  over  it. 

When  much  fluid  has  been  removed  by  paracentesis,  it  is  advis- 
able to  limit  the  movements  of  the  chest  by  a  broad  strip  of  adhesive 
plaster,  or  by  surrounding  the  chest  with  a  broad  flannel  bandage. 
The  operation  of  paracentesis  is  often  attended  by  faintness,  and  it 
is  therefore  advisable  to  give  a  small  quantity  of  some  stimulant, 


EMPYEMA.  127 

such  as  brandy,  both  before  and  after  the  operation.  The  tendency 
to  cough  during  the  removal  of  fluid  may,  to  some  extent,  be  con- 
trolled by  the  use  of  morphine.  In  all  cases,  it  is  generally  desir- 
able to  admmister  morphine  after  the  operation,  so  as  to  promote 
sleep  and  to  diminish  reflex  excitability.  After  this  operation  there 
is  generally  rapid  absorption  of  the  fluid  which  has  been  left  within 
the  chest,  though  occasionally  the  fluid  tends  to  accumulate  again, 
and  further  paracentesis  is  necessary.  The  subsequent  treatment  in 
no  way  differs  from  that  already  detailed. 

Hydrothorax.  The  somewhat  indefinite  term  "  hydrothorax  " 
is  often  employed  in  medicine,  and  it  indicates  merely  the  slow  ac- 
cumulation of  fluid  within  the  pleural  cavity.  This  accumulation  is 
said  to  be  of  a  more  chronic  and  passive  character  than  that  formed 
in  connection  with  pleurisy,  but  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  many 
cases  of  so-called  hydrothorax  are  really  cases  of  chronic  pleurisy 
with  effusion,  in  which  the  amount  of  effusion  undergoes  but  little 
variation,  and  they  are  accordingly  to  be  treated  on  the  general 
principles  already  detailed  for  the  treatment  of  pleurisy.  Under  the 
same  term,  however,  many  passive  effusions  may  be  grouped,  as, 
for  example,  those  which  occur  in  connection  with  chronic  forms  of 
Bright's  disease,  and  those  resulting  from  chronic  engorgement  due 
either  to  lung  or  heart -failure.  The  treatment  of  such  chronic  forms 
of  hydrothorax  must  therefore  be  dependent  upon  the  cause.  When 
ensuing  from  interference  with  the  circulation  and  respiration,  re- 
moval of  fluid  by  paracentesis  is  advisable,  but  when  this  condition 
is  associated  with  Bright's  disease,  it  is  perhaps  better  dealt  with 
by  the  use  of  hydragogue  purgatives,  diuretics,  and  cardiac  tonics. 
Frequently,  however,  it  is  merely  an  accompaniment  of  more  uni- 
versal dropsy,  and  if  the  dropsical  accumulation  in  the  extremities 
is  sufficient  to  call  for  surgical  interference,  the  pleural  effusion  is 
generally  relieved  simultaneously,  although,  in  exceptional  cases,  it 
may  call  for  separate  operative  measures. 

Empyema.  The  existence  of  empyema,  that  is,  the  accumula- 
tion of  pus  within  the  pleural  cavity,  is  often  to  be  inferred  from 
the  circumstances  under  which  the  indications  of  pleural  trouble 
are  developed  ;  but  although  an  oscillating  temperature,  which  per- 
haps never  reaches  the  normal,  may  furnish  grounds  for  suspicion, 
especially  when  the  symptoms  arise  in  a  child  soon  after  one  of 
the  exanthemata,  there  can  be  no  certainty  of  diagnosis  in  the  early 
stages  until  a  small  quantity  of  fluid  has  been  removed  with  an 


1 28  BESPIBA  TION. 

aspirating  needle  or  hypodermatic  syringe.  When,  however,  it  has 
been  proved  in  this  way  that  the  pleural  cavity  contains  pus,  there 
can  be  no  question  about  the  desirability  of  its  removal  as  early  as 
possible,  since  the  formation  of  the  pus  is  in  itself  an  exhausting 
process,  and,  moreover,  there  is  always  some  risk  of  the  pus  seeking 
an  outlet  in  some  undesirable  or  dangerous  direction.  Delay  in  the 
removal  of  pus  is  also  extremely  likely  to  favor  the  formation  of 
adhesions  which  render  subsequent  recovery  more  uncertain. 

The  removal  of  pus  has  been  effected  in  three  ways  :  by  aspiration, 
by  incision,  and  by  incision  together  with  resection.  The  first  oper- 
ation in  no  way  differs  from  aspiration  of  the  pleural  cavity  in  cases 
of  pleurisy  with  effusion,  although,  in  cases  which  have  been  pre- 
viously overlooked  or  neglected,  the  site  of  operation  may  occasion- 
ally be  determined  by  the  bulging  of  one  of  the  intercostal  spaces 
or  by  the  pointing  of  pus  endeavoring  to  form  an  outlet  of  its  own. 
It  was  formerly  recommended  that  aspiration  should  be  attempted 
in  all  cases,  and  that  the  operation,  like  that  of  paracentesis,  should 
be  repeated  if  the  pus  re-accumulated.  In  recent  years,  however, 
this  procedure  has  been  much  discredited,  since  it  is  difficult,  when 
it  is  performed  in  the  ordinary  site,  to  remove  the  whole  of  the  pus, 
and  it  is  undoubtedly  undesirable  to  leave  any  accumulation  of  pus 
within  the  pleural  cavity,  especially  when,  as  sometimes  happens, 
the  lung  does  not  readily  expand  to  fill  the  place  of  the  fluid  re- 
moved ;  and  if  expansion  does  not  occur,  there  is  extreme  probability 
of  the  entrance  of  air,  and  of  the  pus  that  is  formed  subsequently 
undergoing  putrefactive  changes.  Since,  therefore,  this  operation  is 
in  itself  unsatisfactory  when  we  are  dealing  with  pus,  and  further 
since  it  is  attended  by  considerable  risk  to  the  patient,  it  has  been 
almost  entirely  discarded  in  favor  of  measures  which  permit  the 
complete  drainage  of  the  pleural  cavity. 

With  regard  to  the  operation  of  incision,  a  good  deal  of  divergence 
of  opinion  exists.  Some  are  in  favor  of  making  an  opening  by 
which  the  cavity  may  be  freely  drained,  and  trust  to  the  use  of 
antiseptic  measures  to  render  this  operation  comparatively  free  from 
danger.  Others  prefer  making  an  opening  which  is  only  sufficiently 
large  to  allow  of  the  introduction  of  a  small  drainage  tube,  through 
which  the  pus  may  continue  to  flow  into  the  dressings  long  after  the 
cavity  has  been  opened.  With  regard  also  to  the  drainage  tube 
opinions  differ,  some  being  in  favor  of  a  short  tube  which  scarcely 
projects  beyond  the  thoracic  opening,  connected  with  an  expanded 


EMPYEMA.  129 

shield  to  prevent  it  passing  into  the  thoracic  cavity,  while  others 
prefer  the  use  of  a  long  tube  similar  to  that  employed  in  the  slow 
drainage  of  cases  of  pleurisy.  When  the  practitioner  is  free  to 
select  the  site  of  operation,  the  fifth  or  sixth  interspace  on  the  right 
side  or  the  seventh  on  the  left  is  usually  selected,  the  opening  being 
made  below  the  lower  angle  of  the  scapula  in  the  posterior  axillary 
line.  Although  this  opening  does  not  reach  the  lowest  point  of  the 
pleural  cavity,  it  is  found  to  be  that  which  is  most  convenient  for 
drainage  and  for  insertion  of  a  drainage  tube,  since,  if  the  incision 
is  made  further  back  the  space  between  the  ribs  is  greatly  reduced, 
and  the  drainage  tube  is  therefore  liable  to  be  obstructed. 

It  was  at  one  time  recommended  that  two  openings  should  be 
made  in  the  thorax  so  as  to  allow  of  more  perfect  drainage,  and  also 
of  irrigation  of  the  pleural  cavity  with  antiseptic  fluids.  Since  the 
introduction  of  Listerism  this  operation  has  been  practically  given 
up,  and  at  the  present  time  empyema  is  generally  treated  by  the 
removal  of  portions  of  one  or  more  ribs  so  as  to  allow  more  space 
for  the  drainage  tube,  and  to  permit  the  wall  of  the  thorax  to  fall 
in  more  thoroughly.  This  operation  was  originally  recommended 
by  Estlander,  and  the  resection  of  the  ribs  is  effected  after  the  de- 
tachment of  the  periosteum.  If  more  than  one  rib  is  resected, 
separate  incisions  are  commonly  recommended,  although  in  children 
it  may  be  possible  to  operate  through  one  opening.  After  resection 
of  the  rib,  a  drainage  tube  of  fairly  large  size  is  inserted,  its  outer 
extremity  being  covered  with  aseptic  gauze  to  receive  the  drainage 
of  the  cavity.  Even  with  this  operation  discussion  has  arisen  over 
the  desirability  of  washing  out  the  pleural  cavity.  Unless  the  dis- 
charge is  unduly  fetid,  this  is  unnecessary,  and  it  is  generally  con- 
sidered somewhat  dangerous,  many  cases  of  troublesome  collapse 
having  arisen  after  such  injections. 

After  operation  the  patient  should  be  encouraged  to  lie  on  the 
affected  side,  so  as  to  facilitate  drainage.  Happily  this  position  is 
the  one  naturally  adopted,  since  by  limiting  the  movements  of  the 
thorax  during  respiration  it  diminishes  pain,  and  hence  contributes 
most  to  his  comfort.  It  is  of  course  essential  that  after  the  operation 
the  patient  should  be  kept  in  bed  in  a  warm,  well-ventilated  room. 
Immediate  relief  is  commonly  seen  in  the  fall  of  temperature  to  a 
point  slightly  below  the  normal  line.  If  after  a  few  days  the  tem- 
perature rises  again,  there  is  great  probability  of  retention  or  imper- 
fect drainage,  and  it  indicates  the  need  for  changing  the  dressings. 

9 


130  RESPIRATION. 

Even  a  slight  blockage  of  the  drainage  tube  may  be  followed  by  a 
rise  of  temperature,  and  this  is  especially  likely  to  occur  at  a  late 
stage,  when  the  drainage  tube  is  being  shortened  as  the  cavity  is 
gradually  closing.  The  temperature  chart,  therefore,  must  be 
watched  closely,  since  variations  call  for  immediate  treatment.  Each 
time  fresh  dressings  are  applied  it  will  be  necessary  to  shorten  the 
tube  slightly,  but  some  difficulty  may  be  experienced  in  deciding 
when  the  tube  should  be  removed  entirely,  and  sometimes  the  re- 
moval is  not  at  once  followed  by  closure  of  the  orifice.  When  the 
orifice  is  late  in  closing  it  may  be  desirable  to  allow  the  patient  to 
get  up  and  to  move  about  the  ward  or  sick-room,  provided  that  the 
dressings  are  well  retained  in  position.  In  protracted  cases  there  is 
often  some  advantage  in  allowing  exercise  in  the  open  air,  or  even 
in  permitting  the  patient  to  be  moved  to  the  seaside. 

Tardy  closing  of  the  opening  is  most  likely  to  occur  when  the 
antiseptic  precautions  have  failed,  and  under  these  circumstances 
the  health  and  strength  are  liable  to  undergo  great  deterioration  so 
long  as  suppuration  continues.  In  mentioning  this  possibility,  how- 
ever, it  must  be  remarked  that  it  should  not  occur  if  care  has  been 
taken  from  the  commencement  of  the  treatment,  but  I  have  known 
cases  where,  even  after  a  long  time  had  been  spent  in  convalescing 
in  the  country  or  at  the  seaside,  a  second  operation  has  been  found 
necessary  for  the  removal  of  retained  pus.  This  sometimes  appears 
to  be  due  to  efforts  having  been  made  to  force  the  closure  of  the 
opening  at  too  early  a  date. 

The  desirability  of  performing  the  operation  subperiosteally  is  to 
allow  new  growth  of  bone  at  a  subsequent  date,  but  it  has  been 
shown  that  in  children  this  growth  may  be  too  rapid,  and  hence  it 
has  been  recommended  that  the  periosteum  should  be  removed. 

Before  performing  resection  it  is  always  desirable  to  make  an 
exploratory  puncture  with  a  hypodermatic  syringe,  and  to  operate 
only  over  the  site  where  the  presence  of  pus  has  been  thus  demon- 
strated. The  advisability  of  this  precaution  was  well  shown  in  a 
patient  of  mine  upon  whom  my  colleague,  Mr.  G.  L.  Cheatle,  oper- 
ated. This  patient  had  been  sent  from  abroad  with  an  empyema 
which  had  formed  a  connection  with  a  bronchus,  through  which 
pus  was  being  expectorated.  The  physical  signs  demonstrated 
localized  empyema  in  the  front  of  the  right  side  of  the  thorax  ;  but 
although  an  exploratory  puncture  was  made  in  the  accustomed  site 
in  the  axilla,  no  pus  was  found  there,  and  it  was  necessary,  there- 


PNE  UMO  THORAX.  131 

fore,  to  operate  close  to  the  sternum  and  to  remove  portions  of  costal 
cartilage  so  as  to  allow  of  the  introduction  of  a  drainage  tube.  The 
operation  in  this  unusual  site  was  followed  by  perfect  recovery. 
This  case  further  demonstrates  the  wisdom  of  removing  pus  by 
operation,  even  though  it  has  already  formed  an  outlet  for  itself 
through  the  lung.  I  have,  however,  seen  one  case  in  which  the 
patient,  Avho  was  discharging  pus  through  a  bronchus,  passed  from 
observation  for  a  time,  and  on  returning,  careful  physical  examina- 
tion, with  a  view  of  adopting  operative  measures,  indicated  that  the 
cavity  had  completely  closed.  As  a  general  rule,  however,  such  a 
happy  result  cannot  be  counted  upon,  and  it  is  safer  to  remove  the 
pus  by  operation  than  to  trust  to  the  perfect  evacuation  of  the 
cavity  through  the  lung. 

Pneumothorax.  Literally,  the  term  "  pneumothorax  "  is  only 
applicable  to  a  condition  which  scarcely  ever  calls  for  treatment — 
the  collection  or  accumulation  of  air  within  the  pleural  cavity.  In 
the  vast  majority  of  cases,  even  if  air  should  have  obtained  access 
to  the  pleural  cavity  through  some  accidental  injury  either  of  the 
wall  of  the  chest  or  of  the  air  cells  of  the  lung,  the  condition  is 
speedily  complicated  by  some  inflammatory  effusion,  and  the  pneu- 
mothorax becomes  converted  into  hydropneumothorax,  or  into  a 
pyopneumothorax.  The  treatment,  therefore,  must  depend  primarily 
upon  the  cause  of  the  pneumothorax,  and  secondarily  upon  the 
symptoms  which  have  become  superadded  to  the  presence  of  air 
within  the  pleural  cavity.  When  due  to  perforated  wounds  of  the 
chest,  or  to  injury  of  the  lung,  the  patient  would,  independently  of 
the  pneumothorax,  of  necessity  be  kept  in  bed,  and  the  first  prin- 
ciple of  treatment  must  be  to  prevent  the  further  entrance  of  air 
into  the  pleural  cavity. 

It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  enter  into  details  concerning  the  sur- 
gical treatment  of  perforative  wounds,  but  when  pneumothorax 
results  from  injury  of  the  lung,  either  from  overstrain  or  from  per- 
foration due  to  local  disease,  the  most  prominent  symptom  calling 
for  treatment  is  the  frequency  of  cough,  which  it  is  most  necessary  to 
allay,  since  not  only  does  it  cause  pain,  but  it  may  lead  to  the 
further  escape  of  air  into  the  pleural  cavity  during  the  violent  move- 
ments of  respiration.  This  symptom,  therefore,  is  to  be  treated  with 
opium  or  with  morphine,  to  be  given  internally  in  fairly  large  and 
repeated  doses.  If  morphine  is  selected,  it  may  be  administered 
subcutaueously,  and  the  amount  thus  given  should  be  sufficient  to 


132  RESPIRATION. 

diminish  the  reflex  excitability  without  necessarily  causing  nar- 
cotism. In  exceptional  cases  rest  and  the  use  of  opium  may  per- 
haps be  sufficient  to  tide  over  the  time  of  danger,  and  the  air  which 
has  passed  into  the  pleural  cavity  may  gradually  be  reabsorbed. 
Frequently,  however,  even  before  the  accumulation  of  serous  fluid 
or  of  pus,  there  may  be  much  distress  of  breathing,  owing  to  collapse 
of  lung  on  the  affected  side,  and  the  distress  may  be  increased  by 
the  displacement  of  other  organs.  When  the  affected  side  of  the 
thorax  is  much  distended,  some  relief  may  be  given  by  tapping  the 
pleural  cavity  with  an  exploring  needle,  to  allow  the  exit  of  air,  and 
when  tension  has  thus  been  reduced,  it  is  advisable  to  strap  that  side 
of  the  chest,  so  as  to  limit  its  movements.  When  fluid  accumulates 
within  the  thorax,  these  cases  must  be  treated  on  the  general  prin- 
ciples already  detailed  in  connection  Avith  pleurisy  or  with  empyema. 
If  the  pneumothorax  has  resulted  from  the  perforation  of  a  phthi 
sical  cavity,  the  prognosis  is  necessarily  bad,  even  though,  as  Osier 
points  out,  an  early  pneumothorax  appears  to  arrest  the  progress  of 
tuberculosis.  As  a  general  rule,  in  phthisis  it  is  desirable  to  post- 
pone operative  measures  unless  there  is  great  interference  with  the 
respiration  and  circulation. 

Reflex  Cough.  In  the  foregoing  pages  the  treatment  of  many 
varieties  of  cough  has  been  described,  and  it  will  be  seen  that  in 
nearly  every  case  cough  is  dependent  upon  some  definite  anatomical 
lesion  of  the  air  passages.  Commonly  the  lesion  consists  of  one  of 
the  stages  of  inflammation,  and  accordingly  the  varieties  of  cough 
already  described  are  connected  with  more  or  less  expectoration. 
Even  during  the  dry  stage  of  acute  bronchitis  or  acute  laryngitis 
scanty  viscid  expectoration  may  follow  prolonged  efforts  of  cough- 
ing, and  the  character  of  the  cough  and  that  of  expectoration  may  be- 
come modified  as  the  disease  progresses.  The  cough  is  commonly  less 
painful  as  the  expectoration  becomes  more  fluid,  and  therefore  capable 
of  removal  with  greater  ease.  But  apart  from  these  forms  of  cough 
dependent  upon  anatomical  lesions  in  the  air  passages,  numerous 
other  forms  of  reflex  cough  occur  in  which  the  source  of  irritation 
is  in  some  part  remote  from  the  air  passages,  and  the  irritation  is 
conveyed  along  branches  of  the  pneumogastric  which  are  in  ana- 
tomical connection  with  the  air  passages,  and  therefore  permit  the 
discomfort  to  excite  cough  in  a  reflex  way. 

For  the  treatment  of  these  forms  of  reflex  cough  the  first  essential 
is  to  discover  the  cause,  and  it  must  not  be  thought  that  because 


REFLEX  COUGH.  133 

the  air  passages  are  free  from  local  lesion  when  reflex  cough  com- 
mences they  may  remain  in  this  condition  if  the  reflex  cough  is 
allowed  to  continue.  Independently  of  the  discomfort  resulting 
from  the  frequency  of  reflex  cough ,  and  independently  of  the  annoy- 
ance both  to  the  patient  and  to  his  friends,  the  violent  expiratory 
efforts  must  be  checked  so  far  as  possible,  so  as  to  diminish  not  only 
the  risk  of  rupture  of  vessels  during  the  violent  efforts,  but  also  the 
possible  danger  of  producing  emphysema.  In  all  probability,  how- 
ever, emphysema  of  the  lung — that  is,  the  over-distention  of  the  air 
cells  and  the  thinning  out  of  the  capillaries — although  it  may  fol- 
low upon  continuous  violent  expiratory  efforts,  requires  also  some 
degenerative  changes  within  the  walls  of  the  alveoli  such  as  might 
be  induced  by  persistent  alcoholism  or  some  other  habit  interfering 
with  nutrition. 

Troublesome  cough  may  result  from  almost  any  chronic  irritation 
in  the  throat  or  fauces.  The  constant  irritation  at  the  back  of  the 
tongue  or  epiglottis  by  means  of  an  elongated  uvula  forms  a  fre- 
quent source  of  reflex  cough,  and  those  who  are  subject  to  sore 
throats  or  to  chronic  pharyngitis  are  also  frequently  subject  to 
chronic  cough.  In  these  cases  it  is  necessary  to  treat  the  obvious 
definite  anatomical  lesion,  and  so  indirectly  to  cure  the  cough.  Thus, 
for  example,  the  removal  of  an  elongated  uvula,  the  excision  of 
enlarged  tonsils,  or  the  removal  of  adenoids  or  polypi,  Avhich  are 
causing  irritation  in  the  upper  part  of  the  pharynx,  may  be  sufficient 
to  cause  an  arrest  of  cough ;  hence  in  every  case  of  cough  of  doubt- 
ful origin  the  throat  must  be  carefully  examined.  When  found  in 
a  catarrhal  state,  in  the  absence  of  any  more  definite  abnormality, 
treatment  with  astringents,  such  as  alum  or  tannin,  will  sometimes 
check  the  irritation  and  cough.  These  astringents  must  be  em- 
ployed either  as  a  gargle  or  preferably  as  a  spray  or  a  local  appli- 
cation. 

The  mucous  membrane  may  sometimes  be  treated  with  potassium 
chlorate,  or  with  silver  nitrate,  or  the  irritation  may  be  allayed  by 
the  use  of  a  spray  of  cocaine,  but  in  most  cases  constitutional  treat- 
ment has  to  be  adopted  in  addition  to  the  foregoing,  since  catarrhal 
sore  throat  is  most  likely  to  accompany  a  debilitated  state. 

Another  frequent  source  of  reflex  cough  lies  in  dentition.  Refer- 
ence has  already  been  made  to  the  onset  of  laryngismus  stridulus  in 
children  during  the  time  of  dentition  ;  but  though  sometimes  the 
cough  may  be  more  purely  of  the  reflex  variety  devoid  of  physical 


134  BESPIBA  TION. 

signs,  far  more  commonly,  especially  in  rhachitic  children,  dentition 
is  accompanied  by  cough  of  a  true  bronchitic  character,  so  that  rales 
and  rhonchi  are  heard  over  the  chest.  The  treatment  of  such  cases 
must  depend  upon  the  physical  signs.  When  there  are  indications 
of  bronchitis,  appropriate  treatment  must  be  adopted,  but  in  the 
absence  of  such  symptoms  it  is  scarcely  advisable  to  interfere  before 
the  crown  of  the  tooth  is  pressing  through  the  gum.  Benefit  then 
occasionally  follows  the  small  operation  of  lancing  the  gum,  but 
generally  all  that  is  required  is  patience,  with  perhaps  some  simple 
mild  mucilaginous  remedy  like  the  liquid  extract  of  liquorice  or  the 
syrup  of  tolu.  These  are  essentially  cases  in  which  it  is  undesirable 
to  employ  opiates. 

Another  cause  of  reflex  cough  which  may  readily  escape  recogni- 
tion, unless  specially  sought  for,  consists  in  irritation  of  the  external 
auditory  meatus.  Children  are  very  fond  of  inserting  foreign 
bodies,  such  as  beads  or  peas,  into  the  external  meatus,  and  the 
irritation  thus  produced  may  find  its  expression  in  frequent  noisy 
cough.  Plugs  of  cerumen  within  the  meatus  may  also  give  rise  to 
the  same  symptom,  more  particularly  when  they  are  lying  some- 
what loosely  in  the  meatus.  The  recognition  of  the  cause  will  lead 
to  the  adoption  of  appropriate  measures  of  relief. 

The  cough  of  chronic  gastric  irritation,  which  is  less  common 
than  the  foregoing,  occurs  at  a  later  age,  and  it  may  be  suspected 
when  cough  without  expectoration  is  associated  with  indications  of 
chronic  gastritis.  This  form  of  cough  sometimes  accompanies  the 
formation  of  gastric  ulcers,  and  it  is  accordingly  often  found  in  con- 
nection Avith  chlorosis.  The  treatment  of  the  gastric  trouble  either 
by  emetics  in  some  cases  of  simple  gastritis,  or  by  gastric  sedatives 
such  as  bismuth  salicylate  or  other  insoluble  preparations  of  bis- 
muth, together  with  hydrocyanic  acid,  or  by  small  doses  of  ammo- 
nium carbonate  and  rhubarb,  often  serves  to  check  reflex  stomach 
cough. 

Still  less  common  is  the  reflex  cough  due  to  sources  of  irritation 
connected  with  the  liver.  Gallstones  may  sometimes  give  rise  to 
cough,  in  addition  to  their  own  more  characteristic  symptoms,  but 
in  the  other  varieties  of  hepatic  trouble  cough  is  more  likely  to  arise 
when  an  inflammatory  process,  starting  within  the  substance  of  the 
liver,  approaches  and  involves  the  capsule.  An  abscess  within  the 
liver  may  attam  considerable  dimensions  without  producing  cough, 
so  long  as  it  is  centrally  placed  and  so  long  as  the  capsule  is  free. 


REFLEX  COUGH.  135 

Such  severe  disease  within  the  liver  is,  however,  by  no  means  the 
sole  hepatic  cause  for  reflex  cough.  Disturbance  of  function,  the 
result  of  an  injudicious  diet,  may  be  followed  by  noisy  cough  which 
yields  to  purgatives,  especially  to  mercurials.  Cough  may  also  be 
occasionally  connected  with  irritation  of  other  of  the  contents  of  the 
abdominal  cavity.  A  mild  attack  of  peritonitis,  or  an  attack  of  ap- 
pendicitis, may  in  rare  cases  be  associated  with  reflex  cough,  while 
irritants  Avithin  the  intestine,  such  as  the  presence  of  round-worms 
or  of  indigestible  materials,  may  also  be  connected  with  cough  of  a 
noisy  character  which  will  cease  when  the  sources  of  irritation  are 
removed. 

Cough  may  occur  with  inflammation  of  the  pericardium  with  no 
physical  signs  indicating  any  change  in  the  respiratory  passages, 
while  with  aneurism  of  the  arota  cough  is  again  a  frequent  symp- 
tom, though  in  these  cases  it  is  often  associated  with  pressure  upon 
the  trachea  and  with  some  tracheitis  and  expectoration.  Aneurismal 
cough  is  commonly  of  a  noisy,  barking  character,  and  although  to 
some  extent  it  may  be  relieved  by  the  use  of  opiates,  it  is  far  more 
likely  to  be  controlled  by  rest  and  by  the  use  of  potassium  iodide  in 
large  doses. 

There  are  two  forms  of  cough  which  frequently  occasion  much 
anxiety  and  really  signify  very  little — the  barking,  noisy  cough  of 
puberty  and  the  similar  ringing  cough  of  hysteria.  In  neither  of 
these  is  there  any  expectoration,  and  they  cause  anxiety  mainly 
because  the  onset  of  phthisis  at  about  the  same  age  may  similarly 
be  associated  with  a  noisy  cough.  More  often,  however,  early 
phthisis  is  marked  by  frequent  short,  dry  cough,  with  which  may 
be  joined  oscillations  of  temperature  together  with  loss  of  flesh. 
The  noisy  cough  of  puberty  is  frequently  amenable  to  purgatives 
and  to  the  enforcement  of  a  more  moderate  diet,  while  the  treat- 
ment of  the  cough  of  hysteria  lies  in  the  judicious  management  of  the 
patient,  in  assuring  her  of  the  absence  of  definite  lung  trouble,  and 
m  encouraging  her  to  adopt  a  more  healthy  mode  of  life.  Open  air 
and  cold  baths,  with  perhaj)s  the  use  of  sedative  remedies  occasion- 
ally at  night,  may  serve  to  check  the  cough  of  hysteria.  It  is,  how- 
ever, advisable  to  be  extremely  cautious  in  adopting  opiates  in  such 
cases,  since  these  patients  are  commonly  very  likely  to  develop  the 
narcotic  habit. 

Occupying  an  intermediate  position  between  these  forms  of  reflex 
cough  with  no  definite  pulmonary  lesion,  and  the  varieties  which 


136  RESPIRATION. 

have  been  mentioned  in  connection  with  different  pulmonary  dis- 
eases, lies  the  cough  which  is  sometimes  heard  in  gouty  patients. 
"  Gouty  bronchitis  "  is  a  term  which  has  been  employed  to  indicate 
the  liability  to  bronchial  attacks  of  those  who  are  the  subjects  of 
gout,  and  although  in  these  patients  the  physical  signs  of  bronchitis 
may  occasionally  be  found,  these  signs  frequently  disappear  suddenly 
when  an  acute  attack  of  gout  declares  itself  in  one  of  the  joints. 
These  forms  of  cough  are  perhaps  best  treated  with  iodides,  with 
alkalies,  or  other  remedies  which  are  generally  believed  to  favor  the 
elimination  of  uric  acid. 


CHAPTEE  VI. 

DIGESTION. 

Aphthous  Stomatitis — Stomatitis— Gangrenous  Stomatitis — Acute  CEsophagitis — 
Spasm  of  the  CEsophagus — Organic  Stricture  of  the  (Esophagus — Nutrient 
Enemata — Vomiting,  Gastric,  Central,  and  Reflex — Vomiting  of  Pregnancy 
— Seasickness. 

Digestion.  It  will  be  convenient  to  consider  the  disorders  of 
digestion  in  accordance  with  the  same  anatomical  plan  that  has  been 
followed  in  the  chapters  on  circulation,  and  it  is  proposed,  therefore, 
to  deal  in  the  following  pages  first  with  the  treatment  of  diseases  of 
the  mouth,  next  with  those  of  the  salivary  glands,  then  with  the 
diseases  of  the  pharynx,  tonsils,  and  oesophagus,  and  subsequently 
to  take  into  consideration  the  treatment  of  affections  of  the  stomach 
and  the  intestines,  which  form  a  most  important  group.  Of  the 
diseases  of  the  mouth,  that  is  of  the  various  forms  of  stomatitis, 
many  are  most  frequent  in  infancy  or  in  early  life,  and  the  treat- 
ment is  accordingly  somewhat  restricted,  since  the  range  of  remedies 
which  may  be  safely  employed  in  infancy  is  comparatively  small. 

Aphthous  Stomatitis.  Aphthous  stomatitis,  commonly  called 
thrush,  is  the  form  of  stomatitis  most  frequently  seen  in  infants,  and 
is  a  condition  of  inflammation  associated  with  the  development  of 
white  patches  on  the  tongue,  cheeks,  or  fauces,  due  to  the  growth  of 
a  special  parasite,  the  oidium  albicans.  When  the  child  is  being 
reared  artificially  the  first  essential  is  to  make  close  inquiries  into 
the  cleanliness  of  every  article  used  in  preparing  or  administering 
food.  The  disease,  however,  is  not  limited  to  hand-fed  children  ; 
it  may  occur  occasionally  among  those  reared  at  the  breast,  and  it 
appears  then  to  be  dependent,  to  some  extent,  on  the  retention  of 
milk  within  the  mouth.  This  may  be  avoided  by  carefully  drying 
and  cleansing  the  mouth  every  time  that  the  child  has  been  nursed, 
and  by  taking  care  that  the  infant  is  not  allowed  to  fall  asleep  while 
still  at  the  breast.  With  hand-fed  children  it  may  similarly  result 
from  lack  of  care  in  seeing  that  the  mouth  is  properly  emptied 
before  the  child  falls  asleep,  and  it  is  therefore  more  likely  to  arise 
when  the  form  of  feeding-bottle  permits  the  child  to  suck  the  milk 


138  DIGESTION. 

while  still  in  its  cradle,  without  involving  the  watchful  care  of  the 
mother  or  nurse.  It  is  for  this  reason,  among  others,  that  the 
feeding-bottle  with  the  long,  flexible  tube  is  now  so  largely  dis- 
carded in  favor  of  the  older  slipper-shaped  bottle,  which  requires 
to  be  held.  Even  with  a  bottle  of  the  latter  form,  thrush  may 
arise,  particularly  if  due  care  has  not  been  taken  in  washing  out  the 
bottle  every  time  it  has  been  used.  The  disease  seems  to  originate 
in  fermentative  changes,  and  these  may  result  from  decomposition  of 
milk,  either  within  the  mouth  or  within  the  feeding-bottle. 

When  a  practitioner  has  satisfied  himself  that  due  precautions  are 
being  taken  to  prevent  any  further  continuance  of  this  source  of 
irritation,  one  of  the  best  forms  of  treatment  consists  in  the  applica- 
tion of  glycerin  of  borax,  which  should  be  prepared  with  glycerin  in 
accordance  with  the  instructions  in  the  1898  British  Pharmacopmia, 
that  is  to  say,  one  ounce  of  borax  to  six  of  glycerin.  It  will  be 
remembered  that  the  glycerin  of  borax  of  the  1885  British  Pharma- 
Gopceia  contained  less  glycerin  (4  oz.),  and  that  this  was  diluted  with 
two  ounces  of  water.  The  use  of  the  less  dilute  preparation  is  desir- 
able, since  it  is  essential  that  the  borax  should  exert  as  much  local 
effect  as  possible,  and  by  being  of  a  more  fluid  nature  the  action  of 
the  older  formula  was  less  localized.  This  glycerin  of  borax  should 
be  carefully  placed  every  hour  over  the  affected  parts  of  the  mouth 
or  tongue,  and  if  this  is  done,  and  if  in  addition  ordinary  care  is 
taken  with  regard  to  cleanliness,  as  a  rule  little  further  treatment  is 
required.  It  is  found,  sometimes,  that  the  aphthous  patches  do  not 
disappear,  and  it  has  accordingly  been  recommended  that  the  affected 
surfaces  should  then  be  lightly  sprinkled  with  a  mixture  of  pow- 
dered borax  and  sugar.  There  is  very  little  advantage  in  this  treat- 
ment beyond  the  fact  that  it  allows  of  the  employment  of  borax  in 
a  more  concentrated  form  ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  it  has  the  dis- 
advantage of  occasionally  causing  some  cough  if  the  powder  is  used 
at  all  liberally.  In  place  of  the  glycerin  of  borax,  some  practi- 
tioners prefer  the  borax  honey  of  the  British  Pharmacopoeia.  This 
preparation,  however,  is  not  so  strong  in  borax  as  the  glycerin. 

When  the  aphthous  patches  do  not  clear  off  with  any  of  the  above 
forms  of  treatment,  it  may  be  desirable  to  use  stronger  measures. 
T'he  patch  may  be  touched  cautiously  with  caustic,  either  with  silver 
nitrate  or  with  nitric  acid,  but  both  of  these  are  liable  to  cause  con- 
siderable pain,  and  they  should  not  be  used  unless  the  milder  means 
have  failed.     This  objection  does  not  apply  in  the  same  degree  to  a 


STOMATITIS.  139 

solution  of  alum,  which  may  be  well  rubbed  in  over  the  affected 
area.  The  employment  of  a  solution  of  potassium  chlorate  will 
depend,  to  some  extent,  upon  the  age  of  the  child.  When  a  fairly 
strong  solution  (1  in  50)  can  be  applied  to  the  inflamed  surface 
without  much  chance  of  its  being  swallowed,  potassium  chlorate  is 
often  found  to  be  very  beneficial,  but  this  drug  cannot  be  used 
lavishly  with  impunity,  since  it  may  provoke  gastric  irritation  and 
even  hsematuria,  if  much  of  it  is  swallowed.  It  is  advisable,  there- 
fore, to  reserve  the  use  of  potassium  chlorate  for  children  of  suffi- 
cient age  to  understand  that  the  mouth-wash  should  not  be  allowed 
to  pass  down. 

Should  aphthous  stomatitis  still  persist  in  spite  of  all  the  above 
forms  of  treatment,  it  may  be  necessary  to  change  the  source  of  food 
and  to  engage  a  wet-nurse  ;  or,  if  the  child  is  not  being  fed  at  the 
breast,  it  will  be  desirable  to  use  one  or  other  of  the  sterilized  prep- 
arations of  milk.  Many  such  preparations  are  now  on  the  market. 
Some  physicians  prefer  the  humanized  milk  ;  others  prefer  milk 
which  has  been  heated  with  special  precautions  ;  while  others  find 
that  it  is  sufficient  to  dilute  the  milk  in  definite  proportions,  accord- 
ing to  the  age  of  the  child,  and,  should  it  disagree,  to  have  it  pep- 
tonized. Frequently  benefit  is  found  to  result  from  the  use  of  small 
doses  of  mercury  with  chalk,  which  is  especially  beneficial  if  there 
is  much  constipation,  or  if  the  motions  contain  undigested  milk.  ■  In 
severe  cases  of  aphthous  stomatitis,  the  general  health  suifers  very 
greatly,  as  the  result,  probably,  of  the  interference  with  digestion 
and  of  the  constant  discomfort  in  the  mouth.  It  is  therefore  neces- 
sary to  keep  up  the  strength  by  the  administration  of  small  quan- 
tities of  stimulants.  These  should  be  given  in  extremely  small 
doses,  distributed  over  the  twenty-four  hours,  and  mixed  with  milk, 
if  the  child  is  fed  with  the  bottle,  or  else  well  diluted,  so  as  to 
avoid  provoking  spasm  of  the  laryngeal  muscles.  It  is,  as  a  rule, 
somewhat  difficult  to  administer  brandy  or  other  form  of  stimulant 
to  an  infant  who  is  being  fed  at  the  breast.  With  older  children 
tonic  remedies  may  be  used,  such  as  quinine  and  iron,  but  it  is 
obviously  impossible  to  employ  these  for  the  majority  of  sufferers 
from  aphthous  stomatitis. 

Stomatitis.  Stomatitis,  consisting  of  irritation  of  the  mouth, 
with  possibly  formation  of  ulcers  and  generally  with  some  hemor- 
rhage, may  occur  amongst  infants',  but  it  is  more  usual  at  a  some- 
what later  period  than  aphthous  stomatitis.     It  may  occur  during 


140  DIGESTION. 

the  time  of  dentition,  or  it  may  result  from  the  irritation  of  the 
mouth  and  the  salivary  glands,  owing  to  the  administration  of 
mercury  or  iodine.  When  it  occurs  in  young  children  it  may  be 
treated  on  the  same  principles  as  aphthous  stomatitis,  but  there  is 
less  danger  in  the  employment  of  potassium  chlorate,  and  the  local 
action  of  this  drug  may  be  insured  by  the  employment  of  the 
lozenges  of  the  Pharmacopceia,  which  dissolve  slowly. 

Potassium  chlorate  may  also  be  used  in  the  form  of  a  gargle  or 
mouth-wash.  It  is  however  advisable,  as  in  infants,  to  watch 
closely  the  effects  of  potassium  chlorate,  and  to  check  its  adminis- 
tration should  the  urine  show  indications  of  albumin  or  of  blood- 
coloring  matter.  The  following  mouth-wash  is  sometimes  of  great 
service  : 

K. — A cidi  salicylic!       .......  gr.  xv. 

Chloroformi  ........  ^iij. 

Tincturfe  benzoini  compositse  .....  ,^iij. 

Tincturse  myrrh?e   .......  ^iij. 

Alcohol ^iy. 

Ft.  lotio.     S. — A  few  drops  in  a  wineglass  of  water. 

When  there  is  much  bleeding  from  the  mouth  or  from  the  gums, 
the  use  of  some  astringent  is  desirable.  The  most  serviceable  are 
those  whose  action  depends  upon  the  presence  of  tannic  acid. 
Glycerite  of  tannic  acid  may  be  used  in  a  dilute  form,  and  decoc- 
tions of  logwood  or  of  rhatany  may  be  either  applied  locally  or 
used  as  a  mouth-wash. 

When  there  is  much  pain  in  the  mouth,  it  may  be  controlled  to 
some  extent  by  the  local  application  of  cocaine.  The  strength  of 
the  solution  and  the  frequency  of  employment  must  be  determined 
by  the  age  of  the  child,  and  by  the  constitutional  effects  produced. 
Ordinarily,  it  will  be  sufficient  to  paint  over  the  surface  once  or 
twice  daily  with  a  solution  of  1  in  20. 

With  most  forms  of  stomatitis  there  is  considerable  loss  of  ap- 
petite and  of  strength,  which  must  be  combated  by  internal  reme- 
dies. The  tincture  of  ferric  chloride  is  extremely  beneficial,  and 
may  be  given  with  advantage  in  combination  with  potassium  chlo- 
rate, which,  to  some  extent,  renders  the  administration  of  this  remedy 
less  painful.  At  most  children's  hospitals  it  is  customary  to 
administer  potassium  chlorate  in  conjunction  with  the  infusion  of 
cinchona,  or  with  the  tincture  of  cinchona,  and  in  this  mixture  the 
cinchona  is  of  extreme  value,  not  only  on  account  of  its  tonic  prop- 


GANGRENOUS  STOMATITIS.  141 

erties  but  because  of  its  astringency,  which  serves  to  diminish  the 
profuse  flow  of  saliva  which  is  so  commonly  a  feature  of  stomatitis. 

In  toxic  forms  of  stomatitis,  that  is,  those  dependent  upon  previ- 
ous employment  of  drugs  like  mercury  in  overdoses,  the  secretions 
from  the  mouth  are  apt  to  become  extremely  unpleasant,  and  it  is 
then  necessary  to  use  Condy's  fluid  or  chlorine  water.  The  latter 
must,  of  course,  be  employed  only  as  a  mouth-wash,  since  it  is  far 
too  irritating  to  allow  of  internal  administration. 

Gangrenous  Stomatitis.  Gangrenous  stomatitis  is  marked  by 
the  rapid  development  of  gangrene,  which  commencing  frequently 
about  the  cheeks  or  gums  leads  commonly  to  extensive  destruction 
of  tissue.  Very  often  it  has  its  origin  in  tardy  convalescence  after 
acute  fevers,  more  particularly  if  the  patient  is  living  in  unsanitary 
surroundings.  The  rapidity  with  which  the  process  sometimes 
extends  may  lead  to  a  fatal  result,  and  the  possibility  of  this  danger 
must  be  borne  in  mind  from  the  onset,  since  treatment  during  the 
early  stages  may  otherwise  be  lacking  in  vigor.  As  the  disease  is 
so  frequently  associated  with  weakness,  one  of  the  first  essentials  is 
attention  to  constitutional  conditions.  The  surroundings  should  be 
ameliorated  if  possible.  Tonics  should  be  employed  freely,  and 
nourishing  diet  should  be  administered.  Local  treatment  is  neces- 
sary, but  local  treatment  is  not  likely  to  succeed  unless  the  general 
health  of  the  child  can  be  improved.  Unhappily,  in  many  cases, 
the  disease  had  made  great  headway  before  the  child  is  brought 
under  medical  treatment,  and  the  local  measures  are  then  necessarily 
more  severe.  The  gangrenous  patch  must  be  destroyed  by  the  ap- 
plication of  caustics.  Should  it  be  advisable,  the  actual  cautery  or 
the  Paquelin  cautery  must  be  used  to  excise  the  whole  of  the  dis- 
colored tissues.  When  these  are  not  at  hand,  fuming  nitric  acid 
may  be  employed.  With  both  of  these  methods  the  administration 
of  chloroform  is  essential,  since  it  is  impossible  for  the  treatment 
to  be  effective  unless  it  is  used  so  freely  as  to  extend  into  the 
healthy  tissues  beyond  the  slough.  Very  commonly,  after  the  re- 
moval of  the  gangrenous  tissues,  some  degree  of  fetor  of  the  breath 
will  remain,  and  will  call  for  the  employment  of  antiseptic  applica- 
tions and  of  disinfectant  mouth-washes. 

Cases  have  been  recorded  in  which  success  has  followed  the  exci- 
sion of  necrosed  masses  and  the  application  of  a  solution  of  corrosive 
mercuric  chloride,  1  in  500.  These  measures  are  credited  with 
promoting  healthy  granulation  and  rapid  recovery.     Occasionally 


142  DIGESTION. 

the  gangrenous  destruction  extends  through  the  cheek,  and  it  is  then 
easier  to  deal  with  the  case  by  excising  the  gangrenous  patch  and 
applying  nitric  acid  or  strong  solutions  of  corrosive  mercuric  chlo- 
ride to  the  raw  surfaces.  Until  the  necrosis  has  been  arrested,  and 
the  strength  of  the  patient  has  been  restored,  no  attempt  can  be 
made  to  repair  the  deformity  which  follows  this  operation. 

It  is  somewhat  curious  that  with  gangrenous  stomatitis  the  com- 
mencement is  commonly  very  gradual,  and  is  at  first  unassociated 
with  pain.  It  is  only  at  a  later  stage  that  constitutional  disturb- 
ance may  become  severe,  and  marked  by  high  temperature  and 
diarrhoea.  These  symptoms,  however,  ordinarily  require  no  special 
treatment,  since  they  improve  with  successful  treatment  of  the  local 
affection.  In  milder  forms  improvement  sometimes  ensues  after 
syringing  the  mouth  with  a  solution  of  potassium  chlorate,  1  in  50. 
Among  the  constitutional  remedies  to  be  employed  may  be 
enumerated  the  following  :  preparations  of  iron,  preparations  of 
cinchona,  and  preparations  of  ammonium.  A  combination  of  am- 
monium carbonate  with  cinchona  is  often  found  extremely  beneficial, 
since  it  strengthens  the  pulse,  and  at  the  same  time  improves  the 
appetite. 

Diseases  of  the  CEsophagus :  Acute  ffisophagitis.  Acute 
oesophagitis,  or  inflammation  of  the  oesophagus,  commonly  arises  as 
the  result  of  irritant  poisoning,  and  is,  therefore,  happily  a  com- 
paratively rare  condition.  It  may,  however,  occur  in  connection 
with  other  forms  of  inflammation  in  its  neighborhood  ;  thus  it  is 
occasionally  seen  with  inflammation  of  the  pharynx  and  tonsils, 
whether  simple  or  diphtheritic,  and  it  also  appears  as  a  rare  symp- 
tom of  acute  gastritis.  The  treatment  of  this  condition  will  there- 
fore be  largely  dependent  upon  its  cause,  and  Avhen  it  is  dependent 
upon  some  other  disease  it  may  be  quite  unnecessary  to  adopt  any 
special  measures  for  its  relief,  since  the  treatment  which  has  already 
been  necessitated  by  the  initial  disease  will  probably  reduce  the  pain 
and  irritation  of  acute  oesophagitis.  When  it  occurs  in  connection 
with  irritant  poisons,  after  the  appropriate  treatment  for  the  partic- 
ular poison  has  been  adopted,  some  sedative  treatment  will  almost 
invariably  be  required  for  the  relief  of  pain,  while  the  diet  must  be 
so  modified  as  to  supply  the  greatest  amount  of  nutrition  with  a 
minimum  of  irritation  during  the  act  of  deglutition.  This  last  con- 
sideration will  entail  the  use  of  liquid  food  of  nourishing  character. 
The  principal  article  of  diet  will  be  milk,  and  this  may  sometimes 


ACUTE  CESOPHAGITIS.  143 

with  advantage  be  thickened,  either  with  corn-flour,  or  with  gruel, 
so  as  to  introduce  a  sufficiency  of  carbohydrates.  In  very  severe 
oesophagitis,  however,  the  strength  of  the  patient  must  be  maintained 
by  nutrient  enemata,  since  the  act  of  swallowing  is  attended  with 
intense  agony. 

For  the  relief  of  pain,  few  drugs  can  compare  with  opium,  and  if 
swallowing  is  possible',  this  may  be  given  repeatedly  in  small  doses 
by  the  mouth  ;  but  in  cases  of  greater  severity  more  relief  may  be 
afforded  by  the  hypodermatic  injection  of  morphine.  Whichever 
way  the  drug  is  administered,  it  is  desirable  that  the  dose  should  be 
comparatively  small,  and  that  it  should  be  given  at  frequent  short 
intervals,  since  it  is  the  prolonged  anodyne  effect  that  is  desired 
rather  than  the  narcotic.  Care  should  be  taken,  however,  to  dis- 
continue administering  this  remedy  when  it  is  but  little  required  ; 
the  frequency  of  administration  and  the  dose  should  both  be  reduced 
as  the  inflammation  of  the  oesophagus  subsides.  In  mild  cases  which 
are  not  attended  with  much  destruction  of  tissue,  benefit  may  result 
from  the  employment  of  cocaine.  Cocaine  may  be  used  for  this 
condition  in  a  variety  of  ways  :  a  cocaine  lozenge  containing  a 
twelfth  of  a  grain  of  cocaine  hydrochlorate  may  be  employed,  or  the 
drug  may  be  given  in  the  form  of  a  pastille,  containing  either  one- 
tenth  of  a  grain  of  the  hydrochlorate  when  given  alone,  or  one- 
fifteenth  of  a  grain  with  one-thirtieth  of  a  grain  of  morphine.  These 
may  be  dissolved  slowly  in  the  mouth,  and  the  dose  may  be  repeated 
with  any  return  of  pain.  The  British  pharmacopoeial  solution,  pre- 
pared for  hypodermatic  injection,  may  also  be  given  by  the  mouth 
in  doses  of  from  2  to  5  minims,  when  the  local  action  is  desired. 
The  use  of  cocaine  is  sometimes  facilitated  by  its  administration 
with  iced  water,  which  is  in  itself  a  local  anaesthetic.  The  British 
pharmacopoeial  lozenge  contains  extract  of  krameria  in  addition  to 
cocaine  hydrochlorate  ;  hence,  although  it  is  serviceable  in  oesopha- 
gitis which  results  from  inflammation  about  the  pharynx  due  to 
tonsillitis  or  other  acute  ailment,  it  is  not  advisable  to  employ  this 
lozenge  when  the  disease  is  dependent  upon  irritant  poisons,  or 
upon  mechanical  injury. 

It  has  already  been  indicated  that  the  administration  of  any  drug 
by  the  mouth  must  be  reserved  for  cases  in  which  there  is  no  very 
great  local  damage,  for  when  the  condition  is  the  result  of  irritant 
poisoning,  it  is  essential  to  give  the  oesophagus  as  little  work  as 
possible,  and  to  administer  both  nutriment  and  drugs  by  enemata.  In 


144  DIGESTION. 

milder  forms  of  oesophagitis,  especially  when  associated  with  gas- 
tritis, the  irritation  may  be  allayed  by  the  employment  of  one  or 
other  of  the  insoluble  preparations  of  bismuth.  The  subcarbonate, 
the  oxide,  or  the  salicylate  will  occasionally  afford  a  protective 
covering  to  the  inflamed  surface,  but,  on  account  of  its  occasional 
acidity,  the  subnitrate  is  not  generally  employed  for  this  purpose. 

Spasm  of  the  (Esophagus.  Spasm  of  the  oesophagus  is  marked 
by  difficulty  of  swallowing,  accompanied  by  pain  ;  as  a  rule  these 
symptoms  arise  only  during  attempts  to  swallow,  the  intervals 
between  the  acts  of  deglutition  being  ordinarily  free  from  pain. 
This  affection,  which  is  sometimes  termed  oesophagismus,  may  re- 
sult from  a  variety  of  conditions.  It  is  perhaps  most  frequently 
seen  in  connection  with  hysteria,  when  the  spasm  may  occur  as  food 
is  passing  down  the  oesophagus,  while  at  other  times  nervous  excite- 
ment may  produce  a  sensation  of  constriction,  causing  the  well- 
known  globus  hysteriGus.  Less  commonly  the  symptom  may  arise 
from  errors  in  diet.  Individuals  who  get  into  the  habit  of  rapid 
eating  and  of  attempting  to  swallow  food  which  has  been  imper- 
fectly masticated,  as  well  as  those  who  are  addicted  to  the  use  of 
drinks  which  are  either  too  hot  or  too  cold,  may  suffer  from  this 
condition.  It  may  also  occur  occasionally  in  connection  with  gout 
or  with  rheumatism.  In  every  case  it  is  essential  to  form  an  accurate 
estimate  of  the  probable  cause,  since,  although  this  symptom  is  one 
which  creates  discomfort  rather  than  danger,  it  may  produce  great 
distress  if  the  exciting  cause  is  overlooked.  It  must  not  be  for- 
gotten that  the  nervous  form  of  spasmodic  stricture  of  the  oesoph- 
agus may  occur  among  men,  as  well  as  among  women,  and  that 
it  may  arise  in  the  former  when  a  nervous  temperament  has  been 
increased  by  occupation  or  by  alcoholic  habits. 

The  treatment  of  nervous  types  of  oesophagismus  will  often  de- 
mand the  employment  of  many  remedies,  and  in  the  selection  of  a 
drug  due  care  must  be  taken  to  avoid  creating  the  drug  habit.  Thus, 
although  it  is  fairly  easy  to  allay  oesophagismus  with  cocaine,  or 
with  morphine,  it  is  generally  advisable  to  postpone  employing  these 
remedies  as  far  as  possible  in  neurotic  cases,  or  at  least  to  conceal 
from  the  patient  the  nature  of  the  remedy  administered  The  prep- 
arations of  valerian  and  asafoetida  are  perhaps  those  which  give 
the  best  results,  and  these  should  be  employed  in  full  pharmaco- 
poeial  dose  and  in  a  liquid  form.  The  efficacy  may  sometimes  be 
increased  by  the  simultaneous  employment  of  ammonium  bromide. 


SPASM  OF  THE  (ESOPHAGUS.  145 

which  is  especially  serviceable  in  treating  neurotic  men  who  are 
troubled  by  business  worry.  Ammonium  bromide  may  also  be  given 
in  conjunction  with  camphor,  a  drug  which  is  also  particularly 
valuable  for  those  suffering  from  mental  distress  and  depression. 
The  same  class  of  patients  will  frequently  derive  benefit  from  the 
employment  of  zinc  compounds,  in  tonic  doses  ;  thus  the  sulphate 
or  the  acetate  may  be  given  in  doses  of  from  1  to  2  grains,  or  the 
oxide  in  doses  of  from  3  to  10  grains.  The  last  is  most  serviceable 
when  there  are  dyspeptic  symptoms  in  addition  to  the  oesophagismus. 
In  inveterate  cases,  relief  is  sometimes  afforded  by  the  employment 
of  musk,  which  can  be  given  in  doses  of  from  5  to  10  grains,  either 
as  a  pill  or  as  an  emulsion.  In  the  United  States  Phm-macopoeia 
there  is  a  tincture  of  musk  which  is  administered  in  doses  of  from 
1  to  2  fluidrachms.  It  may  be  doubted  whether  musk  has  any 
direct  value  in  controlling  spasmodic  stricture  of  the  oesophagus, 
but  the  penetrating  odor  and  the  high  price  are  important  factors 
in  dealing  with  neuroses. 

In  less  severe  cases,  which  may  resist  the  action  of  the  simpler 
antispasmodics,  satisfactory  results  may  sometimes  be  obtained  with 
different  preparations  of  belladonna.  When  there  is  a  marked 
neurotic  tendency  it  is  rarely  necessary  to  modify  the  diet  materi- 
ally, although  a  concession  will  sometimes  have  to  be  made  in  favor 
of  liquid  diet.  When  dependent  upon  gout  and  dyspepsia,  it  is 
important,  however,  to  avoid  articles  which  would  increase  either 
of  these  conditions.  It  is  also  desirable,  in  such  cases,  to  encourage 
slow  mastication  when  solid  food  can  be  taken,  or  to  render  the  diet 
as  nutritious  as  possible  when  a  liquid  dietary  has  to  be  followed. 
In  exceptional  cases  the  feeding  will  be  best  effected  by  means  of  a 
flexible  oesophageal  tube  passed  into  the  stomach. 

When  associated  with  symptoms  of  gout  or  dyspepsia  it  will  also 
be  necessary  to  employ  remedies  to  counteract  the  exciting  cause. 
Antacids,  such  as  sodium  bicarbonate,  or  preparations  of  bismuth, 
will  often  be  of  service,  while  the  administration  of  saline  purga- 
tives will  further  tend  to  allay  the  nervous  spasm.  When  the  spas- 
modic stricture  persists  in  spite  of  these  remedies,  it  may  be  advis- 
able to  employ  the  oesophageal  bougie  ;  but,  before  using  this,  great 
care  must  be  taken  to  eliminate  other  and  more  serious  causes  of 
oesophagismus.  When  satisfied,  however,  that  the  condition  has 
arisen  fairly  suddenly,  and  that  it  is  not  dependent  upon  pressure 
slowly  exerted  by  an  aneurism,  it  will   be  advisable  to  use  the 

10 


146  DIGESTION. 

oesophageal  bougie,  and  when  much  spasm  is  excited  by  attempts  to 
pass  the  bougie,  its  introduction  may  be  facilitated  by  the  prelim- 
inary use  of  cocaine.  The  bougie  should  be  used  daily,  until  the 
patient  is  convinced  that  there  is  no  organic  obstruction  to  the  pass- 
ages of  food  from  the  mouth  to  the  stomach. 

Organic  Stricture,  or  Chronic  Obstruction  of  the  (Esophagus. 
Cases  of  organic  stricture  of  the  oesophagus  are  marked  by  continu- 
ous difficulty  in  deglutition,  which  contrasts  with  the  occasional 
spasm  of  oesophagismus.  The  difficulty  of  deglutition  may  be  felt 
almost  immediately  after  the  food  has  left  the  mouth,  while  some- 
times, when  the  obstruction  is  seated  in  the  lower  part  of  the  oesoph- 
agus, the  discomfort  may  be  experienced  after  a  somewhat  prolonged 
interval,  and  it  may  be  associated  with  regurgitation  of  food,  scarcely 
altered  in  character.  The  difficulty  of  deglutition  sometimes  occurs 
only  when  solids  are  being  taken,  but  I  have  on  several  occasions 
seen  this  symptom,  in  connection  with  aneurism,  giving  rise  to  dis- 
comfort both  with  solids  and  with  liquids.  With  liquids  the  difficulty 
usually  arises  when  large  draughts  of  fluid  are  swallowed  quickly 
and  thoughtlessly.  One  of  my  patients,  who  had  aneurism  of  the 
transverse  part  of  the  aorta,  suffered  greatly  from  spasmodic  pain 
on  deglutition,  and  he  had  learned  from  experience  that  solids 
would  give  him  less  trouble  than  liquids.  The  latter  he  was  only 
able  to  take  in  frequently  repeated  sips. 

The  causes  of  organic  stricture  are  very  numerous.  Narrowing 
of  the  passage  may  result  from  pressure  from  without,  or  from  some 
cause  of  obstruction  within  the  oesophagus.  Among  the  conditions 
which  may  give  rise  to  stricture,  without  any  necessary  alteration  in 
the  walls  of  the  oesophagus,  may  be  mentioned  the  pressure  exerted 
by  various  tumors,  such  as  aneurism,  either  of  the  transverse  part 
of  the  aorta,  or  of  the  carotid  or  subclavian  in  the  neck.  The  press- 
ure of  enlarged  glands  in  the  neck  whether  these  are  of  tubercular 
character  or  not,  may  occasionally  give  rise  to  this  symptom.  More 
commonly,  however,  it  arises  when  the  mediastinal  or  bronchial 
glands  are  greatly  enlarged  and  perhaps  suppurating.  Another  gland 
which  sometimes  may  produce  this  symptom  is  the  thyroid.  Fre- 
quently when  the  thyroid  is  highly  placed  in  the  neck,  considerable 
enlargement  may  occur  without  causing  stricture  ;  while  if  the  thy- 
roid is  somewhat  low,  so  that  some  portion  of  it  lies  behind  the 
sternum  or  the  sternoclavicular  joint,  even  a  moderate  degree  of 
enlargement  may  suffice  to  cause  difficulty  of  swallowing.     This  is 


CHRONIC  OBSTRUCTION  OF  THE  CESOPHAQUS.  147 

more  particularly  likely  to  occur  when  the  enlargement  affects  the 
isthmus.  A  case  of  this  nature  occurred  in  my  practice  some  years 
agOj  where  the  pressure  of  the  thyroid  not  only  caused  dysphagia, 
but  led  to  oedema  of  the  upper  extremities.  The  development  of 
bony  tumors,  or  exostoses,  pressing  the  outside  of  the  oesophagus, 
may  also  produce  this  symptom. 

Of  the  causes  of  obstruction  arising  within  the  oesophagus  the 
most  serious  are  those  due  to  the  development  of  morbid  growths. 
These  may  be  of  malignant  nature  and  may  arise  from  the  mucous 
lining  of  the  oesophagus,  or,  more  rarely,  they  may  consist  of  poly- 
poid formations  which  obstruct  the  channel.  Less  serious  in  nature 
are  organic  constrictions  from  the  contraction  of  ulcerations  of  the 
mucous  surface.  These  cicatrices  may  be  due  to  syphilitic  affec- 
tions, or  they  may  result  from  some  irritation  which  in  its  acute 
stage  produced  oesophagismus. 

The  treatment  of  stricture  must  be  based  entirely  upon  the 
estimate  formed  of  the  cause,  and  it  is  necessary  to  be  extremely 
careful  in  seeking  for  other  symptoms  of  aneurism  before  interfer- 
ing actively.  When  the  symptom  forms  part  of  a  clinical  picture 
of  aneurism  of  the  aorta,  the  treatment  must  be  directed  to  the 
aneurism,  and  occasionally  considerable  improvement  may  result 
from  large  doses  of  potassium  iodide.  This  drug  appears,  to  some 
extent,  to  influence  the  size  of  the  aneurism,  partly  by  its  effect  on 
the  walls,  partly  by  reducing  the  force  of  contraction  of  the  ven- 
tricle ;  and  although  it  is  undoubtedly  of  the  greatest  value  when  a 
history  of  syphilis  can  be  obtained,  yet  when  the  symptom  appears 
to  result  from  enlargements  of  the  thyroid  or  other  glands,  potas- 
sium iodide  may  still  be  of  service,  although  sooner  or  later  the 
possibility  of  surgical  interference  will  probably  have  to  be  con- 
sidered. If  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  stricture  arises  from 
alterations  in  the  walls  of  the  oesophagus,  it  will  be  necessary  to  ex- 
amine the  food  after  regurgitation  in  order  to  detect  any  indications 
of  the  presence  of  malignant  growth.  These  may  sometimes  be 
found  in  the  form  of  small  portions  of  malignant  tissue,  but  more 
often  the  early  and  rapid  recurrence  of  hemorrhage  will  tend  to 
favor  a  diagnosis  of  malignant  disease.  The  development  of  cachexia 
is  of  very  little  diagnostic  value  in  these  cases,  since  marked 
cachexia  always  results  from  interference  with  nutrition,  even  in 
non-malignant  cases.  A  family  history  of  malignant  disease  affords 
some  presumption  against   taking  a  favorable  view  of  the  case. 


148  DIGESTION. 

When  it  is  considered  that  the  stricture  is  either  of  cicatricial  or 
non-malignant  origin,  the  bougie  should  be  passed,  partly  in  order 
to  ascertain  the  site  of  the  obstruction,  and  partly  to  learn  the  ex- 
tent of  the  narrowing  of  the  canal.  Commonly  the  obstruction 
occurs  in  the  lower  third  of  the  oesophagus,  and  is  associated  with 
considerable  dilatation  above  the  point  of  obstruction.  This  dilata- 
tion allows  the  retention  of  food  for  half  an  hour  or  more  after  it 
has  left  the  mouth,  before  it  is  regurgitated.  In  dealing  with  non- 
malignant  and  cicatricial  cases,  the  bougie  may  be  employed  fairly 
frequently,  with  the  view  of  dilating  the  site  of  obstruction.  It  is 
sometimes  found  that  the  nutrition  can  be  maintained  satisfactorily 
by  feeding  the  patient  with  liquid  food  through  a  soft,  flexible  tube 
passed  through  the  nose  and  into  the  oesophagus.  In  extreme  cases 
the  tube  may  be  left  in  situ  for  weeks,  or  even  for  months,  being 
merely  removed  occasionally  for  cleansing.  It  is  often  found  that 
fairly  large  quantities  of  nourishment  may  thus  be  administered  with 
comparative  comfort,  even  though  any  attempts  to  swallow  may  be 
immediately  followed  by  spasm  and  by  subsequent  regurgitation. 

In  cicatricial  cases,  where  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  con- 
dition is  dependent  upon  syphilis,  potassium  iodide  should  be  used 
in  massive  doses,  which  are  less  liable,  perhaps,  to  produce  symp- 
toms of  iodism.  When  it  appears  evident  that  we  are  dealing  with 
a  malignant  stricture,  remedies  for  the  relief  of  pain  and  for  the 
maintenance  of  the  general  health  must  be  employed.  For  the 
former,  morphine  is  indicated,  and  may  be  administered  subcutane- 
ously  when  the  pain  occurs  independently  of  deglutition,  while,  on 
the  other  hand,  the  pain  which  is  associated  with  deglutition  may 
sometimes  be  controlled  by  the  frequent  employment  of  moderate 
doses  of  cocaine,  or  of  opium  in  the  form  of  a  pill.  Yeo  recom- 
mends that  these  drugs  should  be  given  either  with  creosote,  or 
with  thymol,  and  that  a  quarter  of  a  grain  of  extract  of  opium,  or 
of  cocaine  hydrochlorate,  should  be  administered  with  a  quarter  of 
a  grain  of  creosote,  or  half  a  grain  of  thymol,  made  into  pill  mass 
with  powdered  soap  ;  he  says  that  in  this  form  the  pill  will  dissolve 
in  the  oesophagus,  especially  if  given  with  a  teaspoonf  ul  of  iced  water. 

The  administration  of  arsenic  will  often  afford  considerable  relief, 
and  it  appears  not  only  to  cause  improvement  of  the  general  health, 
but  to  some  extent  to  deaden  the  sensibility  of  the  site  of  obstruction. 
Certainly,  during  its  employment  the  capability  of  swallowing  is 
often  increased,  while  the  appetite  improves.     To  produce  this  local 


CHRONIC  OBSTRUCTION  OF  THE  (ESOPHAGUS.  149 

and  general  action,  arsenic  is  best  prescribed  in  solution,  and  in 
general  the  liquor  potassii  arsenitis  of  the  Pharmacopoeia  is  to  be 
preferred  to  the  solution  of  arsenous  acid,  since  the  hydrochloric 
acid  contained  in  the  latter,  although  small  in  quantity,  may 
excite  pain.  When  employing  arsenic  in  these  cases  it  is  well  to 
give  small  repeated  doses  rather  than  to  administer  it  twice  or  thrice 
a  day  after  food,  since  the  local  action  may  perhaps  be  retarded  or 
diminished  when  it  is  given  only  with  food. 

Reference  has  already  been  made  to  the  need  of  careful  attention 
to  diet.  It  is  obvious  that  in  cases  of  organic  stricture,  especially 
in  those  of  a  malignant  type,  the  diet  must  be  in  liquid  form.  Even 
with  milk  or  beef  tea  it  is  better  to  give  only  a  few  ounces  at  a  time, 
and  to  give  these  frequently  rather  than  to  employ  larger  quantities, 
since  efforts  at  deglutition  are  so  extremely  liable  to  be  interrupted 
by  spasm.  I  have  already  mentioned  this  difficulty  in  connection 
with  a  case  of  aortic  aneurism  ;  the  patient  in  question  was  able  to 
take  a  fairly  large  amount  of  liquid  daily,  but  any  forgetfulness 
involving  an  attempt  to  swallow  a  full  mouthful  of  liquid  was  sure 
to  be  interrupted  by  spasm  and  followed  by  pain.  So  long  as  the 
constriction  is  pervious,  it  is  well  to  trust  almost  entirely  to  feeding 
by  the  mouth.  When  this  gives  rise  to  great  difficulty,  however, 
the  system  of  tubage  may  be  followed,  so  long  as  a  short,  flexible 
india-rubber  tube  can  be  passed  beyond  the  stricture.  Symonds 
recommends  that  a  funnel-shaped  tube  should  be  connected  with  a 
strong  silk  thread,  which  is  brought  through  the  mouth,  or  through 
the  nose,  and  fixed  to  the  cheek  with  a  piece  of  strapping.  This 
silk  cord  not  only  prevents  the  funnel-shaped  tube  from  passing 
through  the  stricture,  but  also  permits  of  its  ready  removal  for 
cleansing.  The  advantage  of  this  funnel-shaped  tube  is  that  liquid 
nourishment  is  naturally  guided  to  the  small  opening  through  the 
stricture,  and  Symonds  has  found  that  under  this  treatment  further 
operative  measures  may  be  delayed. 

When,  however,  it  is  impossible  to  pass  one  of  these  soft  tubes 
through  the  stricture,  the  choice  of  treatment  lies  between  the  fre- 
quent employment  of  nutrient  enemata  and  the  performance  of 
gastrostomy.  The  latter,  notwithstanding  the  serious  nature  of  the 
operation,  affords  a  better  prospect  of  prolonging  life,  since,  although 
it  is  possible  by  nutrient  enemata  to  maintain  strength  for  a  time 
after  feeding  by  the  mouth  has  become  impossible,  yet  it  is  gener- 
ally found  that  sooner  or  later  the  rectum  rebels,  and,  even  with  the 
utmost  care,  nutrient  enemata  are  apt  to  be  returned. 


150  DIGESTION. 

It  is  not  necessary,  in  a  book  dealing  purely  with  medical  treat- 
ment, to  describe  in  detail  the  operation  of  gastrostomy.  It  will 
suffice  to  say  that  it  is  better  to  perform  this  operation  compara- 
tively early  than  to  postpone  it  until  by  the  continued  obstruction 
to  deglutition  the  patient  is  so  far  weakened  that  he  possesses  but 
little  recuperative  power.  This  operation,  however,  is  naturally 
only  a  palliative.  It  permits  of  the  introduction  of  food  into  the 
stomach,  and  in  some  instances  it  prolongs  life  ;  but  as  the  original 
site  of  disease  is  not  dealt  with,  the  end  must  necessarily  follow  at 
no  distant  date  from  an  extension  of  the  growth. 

When  it  has  been  decided  to  employ  nutrient  enemata,  it  must  be 
remembered  that  the  rectum,  although  possessing  the  power  of  ab- 
sorption, does  not  possess  the  power  of  digestion,  and  that  therefore 
materials  introduced  must  be  prepared  so  as  to  permit  of  ready  ab- 
sorption. This  is  ordinarily  effected  by  peptonizing  the  food  which 
is  used  in  this  way.  There  appears  to  be  no  doubt  that  although 
liquid  may  be  absorbed,  the  nutritious  elements  of  the  food,  unless 
specially  prepared,  do  not  readily  pass  through  the  mucous  mem- 
brane. 

Nutrient  enemata  will  be  so  frequently  mentioned  in  the  ensuing 
pages  that  this  forms  a  convenient  opportunity  for  describing  at 
some  length  their  preparation  and  administration.  In  the  first  place, 
before  giving  the  nutrient  enema,  it  is  advisable  to  wash  out  the 
rectum  thoroughly  with  warm  water.  The  next  consideration  is 
the  amount  which  may  be  judiciously  given.  This  should  always 
be  relatively  small,  since  otherwise,  by  distending  the  rectum,  reflex 
contraction  will  be  excited,  and  the  enema  will  be  returned.  It 
has  been  found  that  only  from  four  to  six  ounces  of  fluid  can  be 
introduced  with  reasonable  probability  of  retention.  When,  how- 
ever, the  larger  amount  is  speedily  returned,  the  irritability  of  the 
rectum  may  be  diminished  by  giving  a  small  quantity  of  cocaine,  or 
of  laudanum,  mixed  with  the  food.  The  amount  administered  on 
each  occasion  has  generally  to  be  gradually  reduced,  since  although 
at  the  commencement  of  the  treatment  six  ounces  or  even  more  may 
be  retained,  after  a  few  days  this  quantity  is  rejected,  owing  to  the 
irritability  excited  by  the  frequent  treatment.  The  material  intended 
for  nourishment  should  be  slightly  warmed  before  administration, 
and  this  demands  great  care,  since  if  the  temperature  is  raised  too 
high,  the  albuminoids  may  be  coagulated,  or  the  process  of  pepton- 
izing may  be  checked  ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  if  the  enema  is 


GHBONIO  OBSTRUCTION  OF  THE  (ESOPHAGUS.         151 

given  too  cold,  it  will  produce  some  degree  of  discomfort  and  shock, 
which  will  favor  its  rejection.  The  most  convenient  way,  perhaps, 
for  preparing  the  material  intended  for  administration  is  to  heat  it 
in  a  water-bath,  or  a  hain  marie,  to  a  little  above  the  temperature 
of  the  body,  and  to  employ  a  thermometer  to  avoid  over-heating.  It 
has  been  suggested  that  a  small  proportion  of  acid  should  be  added 
to  the  enema  with  the  view  of  favoring  osmosis,  this  curious  pro- 
posal being  based  upon  the  alkaline  nature  of  the  rectal  secretions. 
The  addition  of  acid  does  not  appear  to  improve  matters,  nor  to  be 
at  all  necessary,  and  it  has  the  very  obvious  disadvantage  of  favor- 
ing irritation  of  the  mucous  membrane.  Even  when  only  a  very 
small  proportion  of  acid  has  been  used,  the  enema,  as  a  rule,  is  less 
able  to  be  tolerated  than  in  the  absence  of  acid. 

Although  water  is  fairly  readily  absorbed  from  the  rectum,  it  is 
always  advisable  to  attempt  to  satisfy  the  craving  for  liquids  by 
administering  water  by  the  mouth,  since  the  quantity  which  can  be 
introduced  into  the  system  by  the  rectum  is  very  limited.  It  is,  in 
general,  unadvisable  to  repeat  rectal  injections  more  frequently  than 
once  in  six  hours  or  so  ;  and  since  this  implies  that  at  the  best  only 
twenty-four  ounces  can  be  given  daily  in  this  way,  it  is  obvious  that 
this  is  wholly  insufficient  for  the  liquid  needs  of  the  system.  Hence 
it  is  desirable  to  favor  the  introduction  of  liquid  when  there  is  com- 
plaint of  thirst  by  allowing  the  patient  to  suck  ice,  or  to  sip  iced 
drinks.  Even  when  the  obstruction  in  the  oesophagus  will  not 
permit  the  introduction  of  a  tube,  iced  water  appears  to  be  absorbed 
to  a  great  extent,  though  it  is  doubtful  whether  it  is  absorbed  from 
the  dilated  pouch-like  walls  of  the  oesophagus,  or  whether  a  small 
quantity  finds  its  way  into  the  stomach. 

The  administration  of  a  nutrient  enema  should  be  made  very 
gently  and  very  slowly,  since  reflex  spasm  is  thus  less  likely  to  be 
excited.  Rectal  injections  are  perhaps  best  effected  by  a  long,  soft, 
flexible  tube,  the  extremity  of  which  should,  if  possible,  reach  the 
sigmoid  flexure.  By  injecting  the  enema  into  the  upper  part  of  the 
rectum  the  liability  to  return  is  greatly  diminished,  and  the  prob- 
ability of  absorption  is  therefore  increased.  The  fluid  may  be  intro- 
duced either  by  gentle  pressure  applied  to  an  ordinary  soft  globular 
syringe,  or  sometimes  a  glass  funnel  may  be  attached  to  the  end  of 
the  tube,  and  by  its  elevation  the  fluid  may  be  allowed  to  gravitate 
into  the  rectum.  This  method  is  extremely  slow  and  tedious,  and 
in  general  the  hand  syringe  is  preferred,  provided  that  the  nurse 


152  DIGESTION. 

can  be  induced  to  use  it  sufficiently  gently  and  sufficiently  slowly. 
With  all  precautions,  however,  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  time 
during  which  life  may  be  prolonged  by  nutrient  enemata  is  very 
limited.  Sometimes  the  rectum  becomes  irritable  after  a  few  days, 
though  in  exceptional  cases  the  treatment  may  be  continued  for  two 
or  three  weeks  or  even  more. 

The  materials  which  can  be  given  in  nutrient  enemata  form  a  very 
limited  test.  The  foremost  place  must  be  assigned  to  milk,  which 
is  readily  peptonized,  and  since  it  is  essential  that  the  enema  should 
contain  the  greatest  amount  of  nourishment  in  the  smallest  compass, 
eggs  are  frequently  added  to  milk,  and  peptonized  with  it.  Some 
practitioners  are  in  favor  of  employing  both  the  white  and  the  yolk, 
beating  up  the  eggs  with  the  milk  before  adding  the  peptonizing 
powder.  As  it  seems  somewhat  doubtful,  however,  whether  the 
white  of  egg  is  absorbed  to  any  great  extent,  it  is,  in  my  opinion, 
better  to  employ  only  the  yolk  of  the  Qgg,  since  it  is  most  desirable 
that  no  insoluble  material  should  be  introduced  with  the  enema,  for 
if  not  absorbed,  its  presence  in  the  rectum  is  liable  to  provoke  irri- 
tation. 

Occasionally,  it  is  found  that  egg  and  milk  administered  in  this 
way  are  somewhat  too  limited  in  character,  and  are  therefore  rather 
readily  rejected.  Under  such  circumstances,  it  is  advisable  to 
thicken  the  milk  by  the  addition  of  gruel.  Milk  gruel  is  sometimes 
retained  better  without  eggs,  but  even  in  this  case  the  use  of  pep- 
tonizing powder  is  still  necessary.  When  eggs  are  employed,  absorp- 
tion is  said  to  be  promoted  by  the  addition  of  fifteen  grains  of 
sodium  chloride  to  each  egg.  Some  practitioners  are  in  favor  of 
employing  beef  tea,  which  can  be  given  with  the  peptonized  milk, 
or  administered  alone  after  artificial  digestion.  There  are  some 
extracts  of  meat  which  can  be  substituted  for  beef  tea  if  desired,  but 
in  general  it  is  well  to  taste  these  and  to  refrain  from  using  any 
which  are  strongly  flavored. 

When  there  is  considerable  prostration,  stimulants  may  be  added 
to  the  nutrient  enemata,  but  the  amount  must  be  relatively  small, 
only  a  quarter  of  an  ounce  of  whiskey  or  brandy  being  added  to  each 
dose.  If  these  proportions  are  exceeded  the  prospect  of  rejection 
is  increased.  Dr.  A.  H.  Smith  has  recommended  the  employment 
of  defibrinated  blood  (Foster's  PraGtiGal  Therapeutics,  vol.  i.  p.  380), 
and  the  method  is  described  as  follows  : 

The  blood  is  defibrinated  by  whipping  with  twigs  as  it  flows  from 


VOMITING.  153 

the  slaughtered  animals.  It  is  injected  usually  twice  a  day,  in 
severe  cases  every  two  or  three  hours,  in  quantity  from  three  to  six 
ounces,  warmed  to  the  rectal  temperature.  It  is  apt  to  cause  con- 
stipation, the  stools  are  rendered  offensive,  and  the  rectum  is  coated 
with  an  ill- smelling  material,  but  these  disadvantages  may  be  easily 
removed  by  the  occasional  use  of  a  cleansing  injection  of  warm 
water. 

Nutrient  enemata,  as  above  described,  may  be  of  very  consider- 
able service  when  it  is  desired  to  afford  rest  to  the  stomach,  and  will 
thus  be  invaluable  in  many  cases  of  acute  gastritis,  or  of  gastric 
ulcer,  especially  when  the  latter  condition  is  associated  with  much 
recent  hemorrhage.  They  are  of  service  in  the  treatment  of  malig- 
nant diseases  of  the  oesophagus  as  a  last  resource,  or  while  arranging 
for  the  performance  of  gastrostomy,  but  their  value  is  greatly  dis- 
counted by  the  short  period  during  which  they  can  be  used.  Nutri- 
ent enemata  serve  to  tide  over  a  difficulty,  but  they  do  not  serve  to 
prolong  life  indefinitely  when  other  means  of  supplying  nutrition 
fail. 

Vomiting,  The  conditions  under  which  vomiting  may  arise  are 
extremely  numerous  and  are  dependent  upon  a  great  variety  of 
causes.  Frequently,  however,  the  symptom  is  so  prominent  and  so 
urgent  that  it  appears  to  claim  separate  treatment.  In  reality  the 
conditions  may  be  grouped  distinctly  into  three  classes  :  First,  those 
in  which  the  symptom  arises  as  the  result  of  some  disorder  of  the 
stomach  or  of  direct  interference  with  its  functions.  This  form  is 
perhaps  appropriately  to  be  termed  gastric  vomiting,  or  vomiting  of 
gastric  origin.  Second,  vomiting  due  to  irritation  of  the  vomiting 
centre  within  the  medulla,  or  of  some  part  of  the  central  nervous 
system.  This  form  may  conveniently  be  termed  central  vomiting. 
Third,  the  comparatively  large  group  in  which  the  symptom  is 
purely  reflex,  from  irritation  of  some  portion  of  the  body  which  is 
organically  connected  with  the  medulla  and  generally  with  some 
portion  of  the  pneumogastric.  This  may  conveniently  be  termed 
reflex  vomiting.  The  term  "  reflex  vomiting  "  is,  in  general,  used 
only  as  an  indication  that  the  source  of  irritation  is  reflected  from 
some  remote  organ,  and  is  open  to  the  objection  that  gastric  vomit- 
ing is  essentially  a  reflex  act.  Although  not  scientifically  accurate, 
however,  the  term  is  one  which  is  found  extremely  convenient  in 
practice. 

The  three  forms  of  vomiting  are  frequently  mentioned  incident- 


154  DIGESTION. 

ally  in  these  pages  in  connection  with  the  various  diseases  of  which 
vomiting  forms  a  symptom,  but  since  it  must  be  dealt  with  in  differ- 
ent ways  according  to  the  cause,  it  may  be  useful  briefly  to  sum- 
marize the  causes  and  the  indications  for  treatment  under  different 
circumstances. 

It  is  obvious  that  the  ordinary  treatment  of  the  more  common 
forms  of  vomiting  by  means  of  gastric  sedatives  must  be  useless 
when  the  act  results  from  central  irritation  or  from  reflex  causes. 
With  regard  to  gastric  vomiting,  such  as  may  be  met  with  in  con- 
nection with  dyspepsia,  or  with  severe  gastritis,  or  with  various 
obstructive  diseases  of  the  stomach,  the  indications  are  in  all  cases 
to  remove  the  cause,  if  possible  ;  for  dyspepsia  and  gastritis,  to 
ascertain  the  error  of  habit  leading  to  these  conditions,  and  to  allay 
irritation  either  by  the  frequent  use  of  hydrocyanic  acid  or  of  bis- 
muth, or  by  the  occasional  employment  of  alkaline  remedies  ;  in 
more  severe  cases,  to  refrain  from  the  administration  of  any  food  or 
drug  by  the  mouth,  and  to  feed  with  nutrient  enemata,  as,  for  ex- 
ample, in  the  treatment  of  gastric  ulcer,  especially  after  severe 
haematemesis.  During  such  treatment  thirst  may  be  allayed  by 
allowing  small  pieces  of  ice  to  be  sucked  frequently,  and  the  seda- 
tive influence  of  the  cold  liquid  is  also  of  considerable  service. 

On  the  other  hand,  when  vomiting  is  due  to  chronic  dilatation  of 
the  stomach,  whether  this  results  from  atony  of  the  walls  or  from 
obstruction  at  the  pyloric  end  due  to  ulceration,  possibly  of  malig- 
nant character,  it  will  be  necessary  to  administer  concentrated  liquid 
nourishment  and  perhaps  periodically  to  relieve  over-distention  of 
the  stomach  by  the  oesophageal  tube.  In  malignant  cases  the  ques- 
tion of  operation  must  sooner  or  later  be  considered  with  the  view 
of  affording  nourishment  or  of  relieving  obstruction,  by  forming  a 
new  opening  between  the  stomach  and  some  convenient  portion  of 
the  intestine. 

When  vomiting  from  dilatation  or  obstruction  is  associated  with 
the  presence  of  sarcinse  ventriculi,  the  oesophageal  tube  should  be 
used,  and  in  addition  the  stomach  should  be  periodically  washed 
out  with  a  diluted  solution  of  sulphurous  acid,  or  of  potassium  per- 
manganate, or  carbolic  acid. 

The  vomiting  of  central  origin  is  to  be  seen  under  great  diversity 
of  conditions  ;  thus,  for  example,  it  may  arise  in  connection  with 
different  forms  of  meningitis,  or  it  may  ensue  after  irritation  of 
some  portion  of  the  brain  during  the  formation  of  cerebral  or  cere- 


VOMITING.  155 

bellar  abscesses.  It  may  also  occur  in  connection  with  cerebral 
injuries,  as  with  concussion  or  with  compression,  esj^ecially  if  the 
latter  is  associated  with  meningeal  irritation.  The  mere  mention  of 
these  different  conditions  sufficiently  indicates  the  hopelessness  of 
dealing  with  the  symptom  by  means  of  gastric  sedatives,  or  indeed 
by  any  remedies  other  than  those  capable  of  influencing  the  central 
irritation. 

With  many  forms  of  vomiting,  however,  of  central  origin  the 
irritation  is  supplied  by  some  toxic  agent  circulating  through  the 
brain,  as,  for  instance,  in  the  vomiting  associated  with  uraemia,  with 
acute  yellow  atrophy  of  the  liver,  with  Addison's  disease,  ague,  and 
other  forms  of  malarial  fever.  These  necessarily  must  be  dealt  with 
according  to  the  cause  :  in  uraemia,  by  means  of  purgatives,  diapho- 
retics, and  perhaps  by  the  use  of  vapor  baths  or  the  wet  pack  ;  in 
ague  and  malarial  fever,  by  iced  drinks  and  by  quinine,  while  in 
Addison's  disease  and  in  acute  yellow  atrophy  very  little  treatment 
is  likely  to  have  any  beneficial  action. 

Of  the  reflex  forms  of  vomiting,  the  different  kinds  of  colic  per- 
haps deserve  first  place,  as,  for  example,  biliary,  renal,  or  intestinal 
colic,  but  in  addition  it  is  necessary  to  mention  the  vomiting  of 
pregnancy,  the  vomiting  of  pelvic  peritonitis,  and  of  perforation  of 
the  stomach.  Sickness  also  occurs  in  connection  with  whooping- 
cough,  with  ulcerative  endocarditis,  and  with  hepatic  abscesses. 
The  treatment  of  several  of  these  conditions  has  already  been  fully 
dealt  with,  while  the  others  will  be  mentioned  in  the  ensuing  pages. 

The  vomiting  of  pregnancy  is  frequently  so  troublesome  that  it 
deserves  more  detailed  consideration  here.  It  commonly  occurs 
during  the  morning  up  to  the  third  month  of  pregnancy.  When  it 
does  not  appear  to  interfere  with  the  general  nutrition  it  is  well  to 
avoid  active  treatment,  though  it  is  at  all  times  important  to  encour- 
age daily  action  of  the  intestine  by  means  of  some  mild  laxative,  as, 
for  example,  by  castor  oil,  by  small  doses  of  cascara  sagrada,  and  in 
addition  by  the  frequent  use  of  fresh  fruit  and  green  vegetables. 
Occasionally  it  is  found  that  some  advantage  results  from  remaining 
in  the  horizontal  posture  for  a  few  hours  after  breakfast,  or  if  this 
is  found  inconvenient,  a  cup  of  milk  on  first  waking  sometimes  ap- 
pears to  diminish  the  frequency  of  this  symptom. 

The  tendency  to  sickness  may  occasionally  be  checked  by  assum- 
ing the  recumbent  posture  on  the  first  warning  indications,  and 
frequently,  with  the  first  onset  of  the  symptom,  comfort   may  be 


156  DIGESTION. 

promoted  by  stimulating  the  circulation  in  the  hands  and  feet^ 
which  are  generally  found  to  be  cold  and  anaemic. 

Although  it  cannot  be  defended  upon  scientific  grounds,  bismuth 
often  appears  to  be  beneficial,  but  in  this  condition  it  is  better  to- 
employ  the  soluble  form,  the  liquor  bismuthi  et  ammonii  citras,. 
than  the  subcarbonate  or  subnitrate  Diluted  hydrocyanic  acid  may 
sometimes  be  added  to  this  mixture,  and  occasionally  small  doses  of 
morphine  are  also  of  service.  Very  many  other  drugs  have  been 
used  with  varying  success,  as,  for  example,  liquor  potassii  arsenitis^ 
ipecacuanha  wine,  tincture  of  iodine,  potassium  bromide,  or  cocaine. 
Acetanilid  and  phenazone  have  also  been  employed,  but  they  do  not 
appear  to  be  of  any  material  service,  nor  have  any  very  good  results 
followed  the  employment  of  cerium  oxalate,  which  at  one  time  was 
recommended  for  the  treatment  of  the  vomiting  of  pregnancy. 

In  very  severe  cases  it  is  advisable  to  keep  the  patient  in  the  re- 
cumbent posture  for  the  whole  or  for  the  greater  part  of  the  day ; 
but  if,  in  spite  of  this  and  of  other  methods  of  treatment,  the  symp- 
tom seriously  interferes  with  the  nutrition,  the  desirability  of 
inducing  labor  must  be  considered.  This  frequently  causes  so  much 
disappointment  that  the  operation  is  delayed  as  long  as  possible,  and 
occasionally  it  is  found  that  the  use  of  sedative  remedies,  such  as 
morphine,  especially  if  employed  as  a  suppository,  may  enable  the 
patient  to  tide  over  the  time  of  greatest  sickness. 

It  should  not  be  forgotten  that  this  symptom  frequently  ceases 
abruptly  as  pregnancy  advances,  and  doubtless  this  fact  has  led 
to  many  exaggerated  statements  concerning  the  value  of  v^arious 
remedies. 

Seasickness.  Seasickness  is  another  form  of  vomiting  which 
stands  alone,  both  with  regard  to  etiology,  and,  to  a  great  extent, 
with  regard  to  treatment.  The  conditions  under  which  it  arises  are 
too  familiar  to  need  description,  although  it  is  often  interesting  to 
endeavor  to  estimate  the  precise  part  played  by  movements,  by 
sights,  sounds,  and  smells,  or  by  other  nervous  influences.  The 
curious  exemption  of  some  individuals  and  the  hopelessness  of  any 
form  of  treatment  in  others  are  familiar,  though  puzzling,  features 
of  this  condition.  There  is,  however,  no  doubt  that,  to  some  extent, 
even  with  those  liable  to  seasickness,  much  benefit  may  result  from 
alteration  of  habits  or  from  the  adoption  of  some  form  of  medicinal 
treatment.  Those  who  have  previously  suffered  should  adopt  a 
light  and  unstimulating  diet  for  a  few  days  before  undertaking  a 


SEASICKNESS.  157 

voyage,  and  usually  they  derive  some  benefit  from  the  use  of  a  mild 
aperient  a  day  or  two  before  starting.  It  is  a  mistake  to  endeavor 
to  check  a  tendency  to  seasickness,  either  by  taking  a  heavy  meal, 
or  by  entirely  abstaining  from  food  for  some  hours  before  going  on 
board,  since  both  of  these  procedures  are  likely  to  be  followed  by 
gastric  discomfort,  which  readily  paves  the  way  for  further  distress. 
Most  sufferers  find  that  if  the  voyage  is  one  of  only  a  few  hours  it 
is  advisable  to  remain  on  deck,  and,  if  possible,  in  an  almost  re- 
cumbent posture,  provided  that  these  conditions  can  be  carried  out 
without  undue  chill  of  the  hands  or  feet.  Although  coldness  of  the 
extremities  frequently  forms  a  premonitory  symptom  of  seasickness, 
there  is  extreme  probability  that  it  may  occasionally  act  as  an  ad- 
ditional exciting  cause,  and  undoubtedly,  by  the  discomfort  it  pro- 
duces, it  destroys  any  hope  or  self-confidence  with  which  the  voyage 
may  have  been  undertaken.  For  these  reasons,  therefore,  it  is 
advisable  to  select  a  sheltered  nook  and  to  have  plenty  of  rugs  or 
wraps.  Brandy  may  be  taken  to  counteract  chill  or  to  allay 
nervousness,  and  soda  water  is  frequently  employed  to  dilute  the 
brandy,  though  it  is  often  useful  by  itself  as  a  gastric  sedative. 

Many  people  are  content  with  these  precautions,  and  find  that  if 
they  can  remain  quietly  reading,  or,  still  better,  if  they  can  doze  or 
sleep,  the  voyage  may  be  taken  with  comparative  comfort.  Many, 
however,  prefer  to  use  some  form  of  medicinal  agent  to  counteract  the 
tendency  to  seasickness.  The  remedies  which  have  been  most  highly 
recommended  are  those  possessing  sedative  action,  and  of  these  am- 
monium bromide  is  perhaps  in  best  repute,  although  it  must  be 
admitted  that  it  is  by  no  means  invariably  successful.  It  is  of 
greatest  service  when  used  for  several  days  before  the  journey. 
Twenty-grain  doses  may  be  taken,  twice  or  three  times  a  day,  for 
a  week  or  so  before  the  journey,  and  a  larger  dose  may  be  taken 
immediately  before  going  on  board,  or,  in  the  case  of  a  night  pass- 
age, it  may  be  taken  immediately  before  retiring  to  the  berth. 
Some  prefer  taking  ammonium  bromide  or  potassium  bromide  in 
simple  solution,  but  the  saline  taste  is  very  disagreeable,  Avhile,  on 
the  other  hand,  the  addition  of  syrup  of  orange  or  of  any  other 
flavoring  material  is  perhaps  still  more  objectionable.  The  larger 
dose  of  bromide  is  perhaps  most  conveniently  taken  dissolved  in 
soda  water,  and  the  sedative  action  appears  to  be  further  favored  if 
this  can  be  iced. 

According  to  Martindale  {Extra  British  Pharmacoposia,  1898,  p. 


158  DIGESTION. 

125),  chlorobrom,  which  is  often  used  for  seasickness,  is  a  mixture 
which  contains  30  grains  both  of  chloralamide  and  of  potassium 
bromide  in  an  ounce  ;  the  mixture  is  flavored  with  liquorice,  and 
the  dose  is  from  |  to  1  ounce.  The  same  drugs  in  15-grain  doses 
have  also  been  recommended,  flavored  with  tincture  of  orange  and 
chloroform  water,  but  in  general  it  is  better  to  avoid  flavoring 
agents,  particularly  those  of  a  volatile  character. 

When  the  journey  is  undertaken  at  night,  moderate  doses  of  mor- 
phine, or  of  chloral  hydrate,  are  sometimes  of  use  in  favoring  sleep, 
and  when  the  voyage  extends  over  some  days  the  former  is  particu- 
larly valuable  in  giving  relief  from  the  exhaustion  due  to  seasick- 
ness. For  short  journeys,  however,  morphine  is  undesirable,  since, 
with  some  individuals,  after  the  sedative  action  has  passed  off,  con- 
siderable nausea  may  ensue.  Moreover,  it  is  undesirable  to  place 
morphine  in  the  hands  of  those  likely  to  suffer  from  seasickness, 
since  their  dread  of  the  sickness  may  induce  them  to  employ  repeated 
doses,  which  might  be  dangerous  if  not  followed  by  vomiting. 

It  is  often  urged,  in  favor  of  the  foregoing  remedies,  that,  even 
though  they  may  fail  to  prevent  vomiting,  they  diminish  the  risks 
of  continued  retching  and  nausea,  and  the  same  advantages  are 
sometimes  claimed  for  the  use  of  a  drop  or  two  of  chloroform  or  of 
solution  of  cocaine  on  sugar.  Dr.  A.  Morel-La  valine  recommends 
the  following  mixture  to  control  the  vomiting  of  seasickness  : 

Be. — Menthol gr.  jss. 

Cocaine  hydrochlorate    .         .         .         .         .         .  gr.  iij. 

Alcohol ^ij. 

Simple  syrup  .......  ^  j. 

One  teaspoonful  every  half-hour. 

In  extremely  neurotic  individuals  the  administration  of  chloro- 
form during  the  whole  duration  of  a  voyage  has  occasionally  been 
employed.  This  treatment,  however,  is  not  to  be  recommended, 
since  the  conditions  may  render  the  administration  of  an  anaesthetic 
somewhat  difficult,  and  prolonged  anaesthesia  is  in  itself  often  fol- 
lowed by  much  discomfort.  Less  open  to  question  and  more  simple 
of  performance  is  the  use  of  firm  constriction  around  the  abdomen, 
some  sufferers  maintaining  that  a  broad  belt  tightly  fastened  around 
the  waist  diminishes  the  tendency  to  sickness. 

Iced  champagne  is  sometimes  used  to  counteract  the  weakness 
and  depression  which  ensue  after  an  attack,  but  iced  soda  water  and 


SEASICKNESS.  159 

brandy  are  often  equally  efficacious,  and  are  perhaps  more  generally 
available.  Among  other  remedies  that  have  been  advocated  it 
may  be  well  to  mention  nitroglycerin  and  amyl  nitrite.  The  former 
may  be  administered  in  tablets  of  -^^-q  gr.  each,  but  both  appear  to 
be  more  rapid  in  action  and  more  efficacious  if  employed  in  solution 
in  suitable  dose. 

It  is  unnecessary  to  enumerate  all  the  remedies  that  have,  at 
various  times,  been  vaunted  as  specifics  for  this  condition,  since  ex- 
perience has  shown  that  the  term  "  specific  "  is  not  one  which  can 
be  applied  to  the  treatment  of  seasickness.  When,  during  long 
voyages,  nausea  and  sickness  resist  other  forms  of  treatment,  the 
employment  of  minim  doses  of  tincture  of  iodine  may  be  tried,  and 
cerium  oxalate,  which  was  once  largely  used  in  the  treatment  of  the 
vomiting  of  pregnancy,  may  also  be  of  some  service. 

It  is  very  rare  for  seasickness  to  call  for  any  after-treatment, 
since,  on  reaching  land,  many  of  those  who  have  suffered  acutely 
are  very  soon  able  to  take  warm  tea  or  coffee,  or  even  a  more  sub- 
stantial meal,  and  they  regain  comfort  as  the  freedom  of  circulation 
a^ain  becomes  established. 


CHAPTEE  VII. 


DIGESTION—  Continued. 


Dyspepsia,   Acute   and   Chronic— Acute    Gastritis — Chronic   Gastritis — Lavage — 
Fermentation — Pain — Alkalies — Acids — Pepsin. 

Dyspepsia.  Although,  in  the  ensumg  pages,  the  more  definite 
causes  of  dyspepsia  will  be  considered  in  detail,  together  with  the 
treatment  appropriate  to  each  condition,  it  will,  however,  be  con- 
venient to  deal  in  general  terms  with  this  symptom  here,  as  other- 
wise it  would  be  difficult  to  avoid  overlooking  many  of  the  com- 
monest forms  of  dyspepsia  in  a  work  mainly  arranged  on  a  definite 
anatomical  plan. 

Dyspepsia  may  be  due  either  to  comparatively  trifling  errors  or 
habits,  or,  on  the  other  hand,  it  may  be  a  symptom  of  a  definite 
pathological  change,  such  as  the  presence  of  gastric  ulcer,  either 
simple  or  malignant.  Happily,  very  many  of  the  cases  of  dyspep- 
sia so  frequently  met  with  in  practice  are  not  caused  by  severe 
structural  alterations.  Perhaps  the  commonest  cause  of  pain  after 
food  is  imperfect  mastication,  which  may  be  due  either  to  excessive 
haste  or  to  imperfectly  working  teeth.  The  habit  of  bolting  par- 
tially masticated  food  is  one  into  which  many  business  people  are 
likely  to  fall.  The  morning  meal  is  frequently  hurried,  with  the 
view  of  catching  a  train,  while  the  midday  meal  is  often  curtailed, 
owing  to  the  pressure  of  other  engagements,  and  instead  of  adapting 
the  amount  taken  to  the  time  allowed,  or  instead  of  regulating  the 
time  so  as  to  permit  of  satisfactorily  masticating  the  food  required, 
many  business  men  are  in  the  habit  of  hurrying  through  their  meals 
with  but  little  thought  of  the  folly  of  leaving  the  stomach  to  cope 
with  an  unnecessary  addition  to  its  ordinary  work. 

Sometimes,  however,  the  fault  lies  in  the  nature  of  the  teeth, 
which  may  be  deficient  numerically,  or  may  be  so  far  decayed  that 
they  do  not  meet  during  the  act  of  mastication  ;  or,  even  without 
decay,  some  of  the  molars  may  be  so  placed  that  they  fail  to  offer  a 
proper  grinding  surface  to  the  food.  It  is  therefore  essential,  at  the 
commencement  of  the  treatment  of  every  case  of  dyspepsia,  to  in- 


DYSPEPSIA.  161 

spect  the  teeth,  and  if  they  are  at  fault  to  see  whether  the  aid  of  the 
dentist  can  supply  the  deficiency.  Every  practitioner  has  doubtless 
come  across  numerous  cases  where  judicious  dental  assistance  has 
sufficed  to  cure  chronic  dyspepsia. 

Another  frequent  cause  of  dyspepsia  lies  in  some  error  of  diet, 
which  may  affect  either  the  quantity,  or  the  nature,  or  the  frequency 
of  the  meals.  With  regard  to  the  quantity  of  food,  in  general, 
undoubtedly  many  people  eat  too  much  for  their  requirements, 
while  leading  the  comparatively  sedentary  life  enforced  by  civiliza- 
tion. Alteration  in  the  habits  of  the  individual  with  regard  to  ex- 
ercise may  suffice  to  enable  him  to  continue  his  ordinary  routine  of 
diet,  but  when  the  conditions  of  life  prevent  the  devotion  of  much 
time  to  physical  exercise,  it  is  in  general  safe  to  advise  some  diminu- 
tion in  the  quantity  of  food.  With  regard  to  the  nature  of  the  food, 
one  of  the  most  frequent  causes  of  dyspepsia  is  the  consumption  of 
too  large  a  supply  of  saccharine  or  of  fatty  matter.  Very  often, 
however,  the  error  consists  in  the  too  frequent  consumption  of  food, 
the  individual  overloading  the  stomach  before  the  whole  of  the  pre- 
vious meal  has  been  thoroughly  digested.  On  the  other  hand,  I 
have  known  many  instances  where  the  trouble  resulted  from  an 
attempt  to  live  on  two  meals  a  day,  the  patient  taking  an  enormous 
breakfast  before  going  to  the  city  in  the  morning,  and  endeavoring 
to  abstain  from  food  of  any  kind  until  dinner  in  the  evening.  This 
attempt  led,  in  one  instance,  to  such  heavy  nitrogenous  meals  that 
albuminuria  resulted,  and  was  readily  cured  when  once  the  cause  of 
this  symptom  had  been  recognized. 

Dyspepsia  Avill  often  ensue  when  liquids  are  taken  either  in  too 
great  quantity,  or  at  too  high  a  temperature,  or  of  an  unduly 
irritating  nature.  It  is,  I  think,  scarcely  sufficiently  recognized 
that,  so  far  as  the  digestive  system  is  concerned,  almost  as  much 
harm  may  result  from  the  consumption  of  inordinate  quantities  of 
strong  tea,  as  from  the  consumption  of  inordinate  quantities  of 
alcohol. 

It  is  commonly  thought  that  the  harm  which  often  follows  the 
consumption  of  tea  is  due  to  the  presence  of  an  excess  of  tannic  acid, 
and  that  if  the  tea  is  not  allowed  to  stand  too  long  this  source  of 
evil  can  be  avoided.  Although  strong  tea  will  undoubtedly  disorder 
digestion  and  will  also  influence  the  circulation  prejudicially,  these 
evils  may  follow  when  weak  tea  or  coffee  is  taken  at  a  high  tem- 
perature.    Those  who  desire  the  stimulant  effect  of  tea,  and  accord- 

11 


162  DIGESTION. 

ingly  drink  it  as  hot  as  possible,  are  very  prone  to  dyspeptic 
trouble.  In  the  former  case,  the  tannic  acid  undoubtedly  disorders 
the  digestive  functions  by  reducing  the  amount  of  gastric  juice 
secreted,  and  by  favoring  the  coagulation  of  food,  but  when  tea  is 
too  hot  it  serves  as  a  direct  irritant  to  the  wall  of  the  stomach,  and 
causes  over-secretion  of  mucus.  Mere  bulk  of  liquid  will  also  give 
rise  to  dyspepsia,  since  the  fluid  not  only  serves  to  dilute  the  gastric 
juice,  but,  by  the  rapid  distention  of  the  stomach,  appears  also  to 
inhibit  its  formation. 

I  have  known  a  case  of  severe  dyspepsia  result  from  the  foolish 
habit  of  emptying  the  coffee-pot  at  breakfast.  The  patient,  an  ex- 
tremely abstemious  young  man,  exhibited  symptoms  which  might 
readily  have  been  mistaken  for  the  results  of  chronic  alcoholism. 
The  nausea,  furred  tongue,  and  morning  sickness  readily  disappeared 
when  he  gave  up  the  absurd  practice  of  over-distending  his  stomach 
at  one  meal.  Careful  inquiry  showed  that  he  was  not  taking  too 
great  a  bulk  of  liquid  in  the  twenty-four  hours,  but  that  the  error 
consisted  merely  in  over-distention  of  the  stomach  at  breakfast  time. 

It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  lay  stress  upon  the  frequency  with 
which  dyspeptic  symptoms  result  from  alcoholic  excesses,  or  to 
indicate  the  advisability  of  always  making  careful  inquiry  as  to  the 
habits  of  the  patient,  since  a  few  words  of  advice  may,  if  the  advice 
is  taken,  suffice  to  remove  the  symptoms.  Should  the  alcoholism 
be  continued,  it  is  likely  to  cause  gastritis,  either  acute  or  chronic, 
which  will  demand  further  treatment.  In  this  connection,  it  may 
be  mentioned  that  dyspeptic  symptoms  are  more  prone  to  occur 
because  the  quantity  of  food  consumed  by  a  confirmed  alcoholic  is 
generally  below  the  physiological  needs  ;  hence  the  alcohol  is  enabled 
to  act  more  directly  upon  the  gastric  mucous  membrane. 

Severe  dyspepsia  may  also  originate  in,  or  be  increased  by,  ex- 
cesses with  tobacco,  whether  the  excess  consists  in  smoking  strong 
tobacco  or  in  smoking  immediately  before  a  meal.  This  question 
of  excess  may  sometimes  be  inferred  from  the  nature  of  the  pulse, 
bat  it  is  one  which  is  most  difficult  to  determine,  since  habit  plays 
so  large  a  part. 

In  most  of  the  forms  of  dyspepsia  above  mentioned,  improvement 
will  result  from  alteration  of  habit,  but  it  may  frequently  be  materi- 
ally hastened  by  the  use  of  various  remedies  ;  thus,  when  there  is 
much  pyrosis,  considerable  relief  will  follow  from  the  employment 
of  sodium  bicarbonate.    Many  confirmed  dyspeptics  are  in  the  habit 


DYSPEPSIA.  163 

of  taking  sodium  bicarbonate  after  their  meals.  The  influence  of 
this  drug  depends,  to  some  extent,  upon  the  dose  which  is  taken  ; 
ten  grains  of  sodium  bicarbonate,  by  neutralizing  a  certain  amount 
of  the  gastric  juice,  may  serve,  in  the  long  run,  to  make  matters 
worse,  instead  of  better,  though  it  will  perhaps  give  immediate  relief 
from  the  sense  of  discomfort  which  may  ensue  shortly  after  food. 
If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  same  amount  is  given  with  some  bitter 
effusion,  twenty  minutes  or  half  an  hour  before  meals,  it  will  pro- 
mote the  secretion  of  the  gastric  juice  and  will  prevent  the  forma- 
tion of  butyric  acid.  The  selection  of  a  vegetable  bitter  is  a  matter 
of  small  importance.  In  hospital  practice  the  infusion  of  quassia 
is  largely  given,  but  calumba  is  somewhat  more  pleasant  and  is 
perhaps  more  generally  employed  in  private  practice.  The  only 
reasons  against  its  use  in  hospitals  are,  first,  its  relative  cost,  and, 
secondly,  the  difficulty  of  preparing  the  infusion  of  calumba  with- 
out abstracting  some  of  the  starch,  which  might  lead  to  decomposi- 
tion of  the  mixture  in  hot  weather. 

Frequently  in  mild  forms  of  dyspepsia  benefit  is  obtained  from 
the  use  of  preparations  of  bismuth,  together  with  hydrocyanic  acid. 
These  are  best  employed  some  two  or  three  hours  after  food,  when 
the  stomach  is  comparatively  empty.  Occasionally,  when  the  ap- 
petite is  poor,  improvement  will  follow  the  administration  of  prepar- 
ations of  iron,  together  with  vegetable  bitters.  The  solution  of 
ferric  chloride  may  be  employed  with  infusion  of  calumba  or  of 
quassia,  since  these  contain  no  tannin,  and  hence  do  not  undergo 
discoloration  on  the  addition  of  iron.  It  is  often  considered  that 
vegetable  infusions  containing  tannin  are  incompatible  with  iron, 
since  they  form  an  inky-looking  mixture,  but  the  physiological 
activity  does  not  appear  to  be  in  any  way  altered  by  this  change, 
although  perhaps,  from  its  repulsive  appearance,  a  mixture  of  iron 
with  infusion  of  cinchona,  or  infusion  of  gentian,  is  less  likely  to 
be  taken  readily.  It  is  sometimes  found  that  the  actions  of  any  of 
the  above  remedies  are  materially  assisted  by  the  occasional  employ- 
ment of  saline  purgatives,  but  greater  benefit  will  often  result  from 
the  use  of  calomel  at  bedtime,  with  a  dose  of  black  draught,  or 
with  one  or  other  of  the  purgative  mineral  waters,  on  rising  in  the 
morning.  These  remedies  will  frequently  remove  the  headache  of 
dyspepsia,  which  is  generally  of  a  dull,  heavy  character,  and  in  all 
probability  they  act  mainly  by  the  removal  of  various  toxins,  which 
may  be  formed  and  absorbed  during  prolonged  constipation. 


164  DIGESTION. 

It  is  only  in  comparatively  rare  cases  of  simple  dyspepsia  that  it 
is  necessary  to  use  pepsin  to  assist  the  digestion,  though  when  the 
condition  contmues,  in  spite  of  alterations  in  errors  of  diet  and 
habits  of  life,  and  in  spite  of  the  use  of  tonics,  it  may  be  desirable 
to  employ  this  remedy.  Generally,  as  has  been  said,  it  is  necessary, 
in  every  case  of  dyspepsia,  to  insist  upon  reduction  in  the  amount 
of  food  taken  and  to  allow  time  for  the  digestion  to  be  effected 
thoroughly.  Very  often  when  the  digestive  powers  are  weak  it  is 
advisable  to  recommend  the  consumption  of  less  liquid.  The  action 
of  the  gastric  juice  is  extremely  likely  to  be  reduced  if  quantities  of 
liquid  are  taken  with  the  meal,  and,  further,  the  difficulty  is  made 
greater  by  a  larger  amount  of  food  being  taken  when  the  act  of 
deglutition  is  assisted  by  copious  draughts  of  liquid. 

When  there  is  very  much  trouble  with  flatulence,  relief  is  often 
afforded  from  the  use  of  charcoal,  which  should  be  given  either  as 
the  powder  in  wafer  paper,  in  doses  of  from  60  to  120  grains,  or 
stirred  up  with  water,  or  made  into  biscuits.  The  charcoal  appears 
to  absorb  gases  and  also  to  influence  chemical  changes  occurring  in 
the  stomach. 

An  increased  amount  of  exercise  will  often  be  very  beneficial. 
Many  who  are  dyspeptic  so  long  as  they  live  in  large  towns  and 
follow  their  ordinary  occupation,  will  lose  their  troubles  during  a 
holiday  in  which  exercise  is  taken,  and  the  symptom  will  often  be 
greatly  reduced  if  arrangements  can  be  made  for  some  form  of 
bodily  exercise  which  does  not  involve  complete  interference  with 
their  ordinary  work.  Chronic  dyspepsia  is  often  beneficially  treated 
by  horse  exercise,  and  if  this  is  beyond  the  patient's  means  a  bicycle 
ride  will  often  form  a  good  substitute. 

There  are  many  forms  of  chronic  dyspepsia  in  which  the  symp- 
tom appears  to  result  from  the  existence  of  some  chronic  malady  or 
dyscrasia  ;  thus,  in  connection  with  chronic  kidney  disease,  dysjjepsia 
is  a  prominent  symptom,  and  when  it  occurs  late  in  the  course  of 
the  disease  it  may  even  be  an  indication  of  uraemia.  Although  it 
is  still  advisable,  under  these  circumstances,  to  use  the  remedies  for 
simple  dyspepsia,  it  will  often  be  found  that  these  are  of  little 
service  unless  the  elimination  of  nitrogenous  material  is  assisted, 
either  by  the  frequent  use  of  laxatives,  or  by  the  occasional  employ- 
ment of  a  vapor  bath.  This  subject  will,  however,  be  found  more 
f  ally  dealt  with  in  the  chapters  on  kidney  diseases.  Dyspepsia  also 
forms  a  prominent  symptom  in  gout  and  in  rheumatism,  and  the 


ACUTE  GASTRITIS.  165 

primary  disease  has  then  to  be  dealt  with  simultaneously  with  the 
treatment  of  the  symptom.  With  heart  disease,  with  chronic  lung 
disease,  and  with  diseases  of  the  liver  which  impede  the  portal  cir- 
culation, dyspepsia  may  result  from  interference  with  the  removal 
of  blood  from  the  veins  of  the  stomach,  or  from  deficient  blood 
supply  through  the  arteries.  When  dyspepsia  occurs  in  connection 
with  any  of  the  above-named  conditions,  benefit  will  often  follow 
the  administration  of  mercurials  and  of  saline  purgatives,  but 
simultaneous  treatment  of  the  primary  disease  is  also  essential. 

Acute  Gastritis.  Acute  gastritis,  or  acute  gastric  catarrh,  is 
most  likely  to  arise  from  severe  irritation  of  the  stomach,  either  by 
indigestible  materials  or  by  direct  irritants,  such  as  excesses  of 
alcohol,  or  the  accidental  or  intentional  introduction  of  some  other 
irritant  poison.  The  first  essential,  therefore,  in  any  case  of  acute 
gastritis  is  to  endeavor  to  ascertain  the  cause,  and  if  there  is  reason 
to  believe  that  the  cause  remains  within  the  stomach,  it  is  neces- 
sary to  effect  its  prompt  removal.  In  many  cases  of  acute  gastritis 
vomiting  has  already  formed  one  of  the  prominent  symptoms  before 
the  patient  has  come  under  treatment,  and  therefore  there  is  prob- 
ably no  further  need  to  employ  emetics  or  any  other  form  of  treat- 
ment to  remove  the  source  of  irritation. 

When,  however,  the  patient  is  suffering  from  severe  gastric  pain, 
evidently  due  to  an  irritant  retained  within  the  stomach,  it  will  be 
desirable  to  consider  the  best  method  for  its  speedy  removal.  This 
is  perhaps  most  conveniently  performed  by  introducing  a  long,  soft, 
flexible  tube  and  washing  out  the  stomach  by  siphon  action  ;  the 
mode  of  performing  lavage — that  is,  the  rapid  removal  of  the  con- 
tents of  the  stomach  and  the  irrigation  of  the  mucous  membrane 
with  a  bland  fluid — will  be  more  fully  described  under  the  heading 
of  Chronic  Gastritis  (see  p.  172).  By  successive  washings  the  con- 
tents may  be  thus  removed  until  the  fluid  which  passes  out  is  color- 
less and  odorless.  Should  no  long,  flexible  tube  be  available,  it  will 
be  necessary  to  employ  emetics,  and  it  is  desirable  to  select  an 
emetic  which  acts  promptly  and  produces  little  local  irritation  or 
subsequent  depression.  The  choice  usually  rests  between  zinc  sul- 
phate and  ammonium  carbonate.  The  more  homely  emetics  which 
are  employed,  such  as  mustard  or  salt  and  water,  usually  increase 
discomfort  by  their  action  on  the  inflamed  surface.  When  employ- 
ing zinc  sulphate  or  ammonium  carbonate,  it  is  advisable  to  give 
somewhat  large  doses  and  to  follow  the  administration  with  two  or 


166  DIGESTION. 

more  tumblerf uls  of  lukewarm  water,  until  the  act  of  vomiting  is 
excited.  The  administration  of  apomorphine,  either  by  the  mouth 
or  subcutaneously,  is  contraindicated  on  account  of  the  depression 
which  sometimes  ensues,  and  also  on  account  of  the  act  of  vomiting 
thus  excited  being  occasionally  repeated. 

When,  however,  some  considerable  time  has  elapsed  since  the 
source  of  irritation  has  been  taken,  the  use  of  an  emetic  is  less  im- 
perative, and  the  removal  from  the  stomach  of  any  remnants  of  the 
irritant  may  be  facilitated  by  the  administration  of  a  mild  saline 
purgative. 

In  acute  gastritis  it  is  always  necessary  to  employ  measures  cal- 
culated to  subdue  pain,  which  frequently  persists  even  after  vomit- 
ing has  ceased.  For  the  immediate  relief  of  pain  it  may  be  desirable 
to  employ  external  applications  as  well  as  internal  remedies,  but  in 
severe  cases  it  is  essential  to  adopt  measures  for  insuring  rest, 
especially  when  vomiting  is  frequent.  The  patient  should  be  kept 
in  the  recumbent  posture,  and  his  clothing  should  be  loose  and  light. 
All  sources  of  extraneous  irritation  should  be  removed,  and  in  very 
severe  cases  it  may  be  necessary  to  insist  on  absolute  silence,  and 
even  on  the  mental  quiet  which  ensues  after  the  room  has  been 
darkened.  The  most  serviceable  external  applications  are  those  by 
which  heat  is  applied  over  the  epigastrium.  A  mustard  plaster, 
with  1  part  of  mustard  to  4  of  flour  or  of  linseed,  may  be  placed 
upon  the  epigastrium,  and  retained  there  as  long  as  possible.  Some- 
times these  proportions  are  rather  too  strong,  and  preference  has 
been  expressed  for  milder  applications.  Certainly  when  mixed  in 
the  proportion  of  1  to  10  the  mustard  plaster  can  be  endured  for  a 
greater  length  of  time,  and  its  benefits  are  therefore  more  prolonged. 
A  less  severe  treatment,  and  one  which  is  perhaps  more  readily 
accepted  by  the  patient,  is  the  application  of  hot  fomentations  over 
the  epigastrium,  and  their  efficacy  may  be  increased  by  sprinkling 
the  surface  of  the  flannel  or  spongiopiline  with  turpentine  or  oil 
of  cajuput.  Either  of  these  will  increase  the  sense  of  warmth,  but 
from  their  volatile  character  they  may  give  rise  to  nausea,  and 
should  then  be  discontinued.  When  vomiting  persists  in  spite  of 
these  warm  applications,  it  will  be  desirable  to  adopt  other  meas- 
ures, the  foremost  being  the  application  of  cold.  A  fairly  large 
india-rubber  bag,  filled  with  ice,  may  be  applied  over  the  epigas- 
trium, and  will  sometimes  afford  relief  in  rebellious  cases.  Some- 
what more  manageable,  if  available,  is  the  application  of  cold  by 


ACUTE  GASTRITIS.  167 

means  of  Leiter's  tubes,  which  are  to  be  preferred,  as  they  are  not 
so  heavy,  and  therefore  are  more  easily  tolerated. 

While  these  external  applications  are  being  employed,  it  is  neces- 
sary also  to  administer  remedies  internally  for  the  relief  of  pain. 
Moderate  doses  of  opium  generally  give  the  best  results,  but  they 
must  be  employed  with  caution,  since  they  may  promote  constipa- 
tion and  subsequent  headache.  It  has  also  been  found  that,  although 
opium  may  relieve  pain,  if  administered  after  vomiting  has  ceased, 
it  occasionally  appears  to  favor  the  frequency  of  vomiting,  if  given 
too  early.  In  mild  attacks  the  following  draught  frequently  re- 
lieves headache  and  gastric  discomfort  : 


R. 

— Potassii  bromidi     .... 

gr.  XV 

Spiritus  chloroformi 

mxx. 

Tincturae  gentianpe  composita? 

m^- 

Tincturpe  cardamomi  compositse 

mx. 

Spiritus  ammonise  aromatici   . 

m^- 

Syrupi 

.^ss. 

Aquse  menthpe  piperitse 

q.  s.  ad 

ly 

Of  other  gastric  sedatives  the  most  important  are  the  insoluble 
salts  of  bismuth  and  diluted  hydrocyanic  acid.  These  may  be  given 
in  combination  or  alone  ;  the  salts  of  bismuth  have  the  further 
advantage  that  they  not  only  allay  pain  and  irritation,  but  also  act 
as  direct  antidotes  to  free  acids.  They  are  thus  of  peculiar  value 
in  cases  of  acute  gastritis  due  to  poisoning  with  mineral  acids,  but 
even  when  the  disease  is  the  result  of  excessive  consumption  of 
alcohol  or  of  food,  the  salts  of  bismuth  serve  to  neutralize  the  free 
acids  produced  by  the  decomposition  or  fermentation  of  food  within 
the  stomach. 

The  selection  of  the  bismuth  compound  will,  to  a  certain  extent, 
depend  on  the  stage  of  acute  gastritis.  In  the  early  stages,  when 
there  is  but  little  reason  to  suspect  retention  and  decomposition  of 
food,  the  subcarbonate  or  the  oxide  will  probably  be  of  the  greatest 
service.  The  subnitrate  is  often  employed  at  this  time,  but  it  must 
be  borne  in  mind  in  administering  the  subnitrate  that  owing  to  its 
frequent  acid  reaction  it  may  cause  effervescence  when  given  with 
any  of  the  alkaline  carbonates,  which  are  often  indicated  in  these 
cases.  At  a  later  stage,  when  fermentation  is  progressing,  bismuth 
salicylate  is  frequently  more  serviceable  than  any  of  the  above, 
since  it  decomposes  within  the  stomach,  and  then  affords  both  the 
sedative  action  of  bismuth  and  the  antiseptic  action  of  salicylic  acid. 


168  DIGESTION. 

When  administering  preparations  of  bismuth  in  acute  gastritis,  the 
efficacy  is  very  greatly  increased  by  giving  them  upon  an  empty 
stomach. 

Although  it  is  bad  pharmacy  to  prescribe  bismuth  subnitrate  with 
alkaline  carbonates,  these  are  often  administered  with  citric  acid,  to 
obtain  the  sedative  action  of  free  carbonic  acid.  When  employed 
in  this  way  it  is  desirable  to  form  an  alkaline  solution  with  sodium 
bicarbonate,  and  to  mix  finely  powdered  citric  acid  with  this  solu- 
tion when  it  is  about  to  be  taken,  so  that  the  draught  is  swallowed 
during  effervescence.  The  amounts  of  alkali  and  acid  thus  given 
should  allow  of  an  excess  of  free  alkali  after  effervescence  has 
ceased.  Fifteen  grains  of  powdered  citric  acid,  dissolved  in  a  table- 
spoonful  of  water,  can  be  mixed  with  from  20  to  25  grains  of 
sodium  bicarbonate,  dissolved  in  two  tablespoonsfuls  of  water.  The 
sedative  action  of  this  mixture  may  be  increased  by  its  association 
with  diluted  hydrocyanic  acid,  or  with  cherry-laurel  water,  and  it  is 
often  found  that,  after  the  use  of  effervescing  mixtures  of  this 
nature,  copious  eructations  of  gas  will  result,  and  their  removal  will 
be  followed  by  considerable  relief. 

During  the  early  stages  of  severe  acute  gastritis  some  degree  of 
diarrhoea  occasionally  arises,  and  it  is  not  advisable  to  endeavor  to 
arrest  this  symptojn  unless  it  appears  to  be  causing  considerable 
weakness.  The  diarrhoea  is  commonly  an  indication  of  the  associa- 
tion of  enteritis,  by  which  the  elimination  of  irritants  is  favored, 
and  it  is  therefore  better  to  assist  elimination  by  employing  purga- 
tives or  laxatives  instead  of  astringents.  An  ordinary  saline  purga- 
tive may  be  of  value,  or,  when  vomiting  contraindicates  the 
administration  of  a  saline  purgative  in  bulk,  it  will  be  better  to  use 
average  doses  of  gray  powder  or  of  calomel.  When,  however,  the 
diarrhoea  is  more  persistent  and  troublesome,  and  when  it  produces 
much  collapse,  it  should  be  arrested  by  the  use  of  astringents  or 
opiates,  the  best  astringents  for  this  purpose  being  those  whose  action 
is  independent  of  the  presence  of  tannic  acid.  The  chalk  mixture 
of  the  United  States  Pharmacopoeia,  or  one  other  of  the  bismuth 
salts  above  mentioned,  may  be  combined  with  small  doses  of  opium. 

The  dietary  of  acute  gastritis  is  naturally  of  great  importance, 
both  during  the  attack  and  during  convalescence.  At  the  onset,  it 
is  desirable  to  give  the  stomach  as  little  as  possible  to  do,  and 
patients  readily  fall  in  with  the  suggestion  of  affording  complete 
rest  for  the  stomach  by  abstinence  from  food  for  twenty-four  to 


ACUTE  GASTRITIS.  169 

thirty-six  hours,  or  even  more.  During  this  time  thirst  may  be 
relieved  by  allowing  small  pieces  of  ice  to  be  sucked  repeatedly. 
When,  however,  there  is  complaint  of  weakness,  the  time  of  enforced 
abstinence  may  be  prolonged  by  the  judicious  use  of  a  few  minims 
of  tincture  of  opium,  given  at  frequent  short  intervals. 

When,  nevertheless,  the  patient  still  feels  faint,  it  may  be  neces- 
sary, during  the  first  day  or  two,  to  administer  nutrient  enemata  or 
nutrient  suppositories.  In  acute  gastritis,  however,  these  are  to  be 
regarded  merely  as  the  means  of  satisfying  the  patient,  while  insur- 
ing rest  for  his  stomach,  and  they  need  not  therefore  be  employed 
frequently.  The  conditions  under  which  acute  gastritis  arises  will, 
however,  afford  some  guidance  as  to  the  propriety  of  withholding 
food.  When  the  attack  occurs  after  indiscretions  with  alcohol  or 
with  food,  the  patient  is,  as  a  rule,  the  better  for  a  day  or  two  of 
starvation.  On  the  other  hand,  when  it  is  the  result  of  irritant 
poisoning,  nutrient  enemata  are  more  urgently  called  for,  and  it  will 
then  also  be  desirable  to  administer  bland,  unirritating  food,  so  soon 
as  it  can  be  retained.  For  this  purpose,  although  the  idiosyncrasy 
of  the  patient  has  to  be  considered,  milk  may  be  given.  It  is  some- 
times best  tolerated  when  given  frequently  in  small  quantities,  and 
when  given  cold  ;  milk  that  has  been  boiled  and  afterward  allowed 
to  cool,  or  milk  to  which  ice  has  been  added,  will  often  assist  in 
allaying  pain  and  in  checking  the  frequency  of  vomiting.  The  pro- 
longed employment  of  milk  may  be  facilitated  if  it  is  somewhat 
thickened  either  with  arrowroot  or  with  corn-flour,  but  in  general  it 
is  better,  if  possible,  to  defer  the  use  of  carbohydrates  until  the 
acute  stage  of  the  disease  shows  signs  of  abatement,  since  carbo- 
hydrates, if  not  digested,  are  prone  to  undergo  decomposition,  and 
thus  increase  the  discomfort. 

The  return  to  ordinary  diet,  after  acute  gastritis,  must  be  effected 
very  gradually  ;  during  convalescence  the  nourishing  character  of 
the  diet  is  greatly  increased  by  the  addition  of  beef  tea,  or  chicken 
broth,  and  later  by  that  of  fish  and  chicken,  but  it  is  important  to 
caution  the  patient  against  the  use  of  any  form  of  alcohol,  since  its 
administration  is  always  apt  to  be  followed  by  pain  and  frequently 
by  some  return  of  acute  symptoms. 

All  well-known  indigestible  articles  should  be  carefully  excluded 
from  the  dietary.  The  patient  should  avoid  pastry,  sugar,  strong 
tea,  or  strong  coffee,  and  both  food  and  drink  should,  in  general,  be 
taken  at  a  moderately  low  temperature.    Any  hot  drink  is  likely  to 


170  DIGESTION. 

provoke  further  discomfort.  Convalescence  is  commonly  attended 
by  constipation,  and  mild  purgatives  will  therefore  be  required, 
such  as  small  doses  of  aloes,  which  may  be  administered  as  ordinary 
dinner-pills,  or  small  doses  of  rhubarb,  which  when  taken  after 
meals  act  beneficially  on  the  stomach,  as  well  as  on  the  intestine. 
Sometimes,  if  the  former  produces  much  rectal  irritation,  or  if  the 
employment  of  the  latter  is  followed  by  any  subsequent  constipa- 
tion, these  remedies  may  give  place  to  saline  purgatives,  such  as 
magnesium  sulphate,  or  sodium  sulphate,  or  potassium  and  sodium 
tartrate.  Preference  is  often  expressed  for  purgative  saline  waters, 
such  as  Pullna  water,  or  Hunyadi,  or  Apenta  ;  these,  like  other 
salines,  are  most  efficacious  when  taken  in  the  early  morning  on 
first  rising. 

Chronic  Gastritis.  Chronic  gastritis,  or  chronic  gastric  catarrh, 
arises  under  such  a  variety  of  conditions  that  routine  treatment  is 
impossible,  for,  as  in  so  many  diseases,  it  is  absolutely  necessary  to 
ascertain  the  cause  of  the  gastric  catarrh,  and  in  a  large  proportion 
it  is  only  possible  to  treat  the  catarrh  indirectly  by  dealing  with  its 
cause.  Thus  chronic  gastritis  may  occur  when  the  importance  of 
an  acute  attack  has  been  underrated  and  the  conditions  under  Avhich 
it  has  arisen  have  been  ignorantly  continued,  such  as  excess  of 
alcohol,  or  some  error  of  diet.  Chronic  gastritis  may  also  occur  as 
a  complication  in  the  course  of  diseases  of  many  of  the  viscera,  more 
particularly  when  these  diseases  result  in  impeded  circulation 
through  the  stomach.  Thus,  it  may  arise  in  connection  with  any 
form  of  heart  disease,  in  which  venous  obstruction  is  a  prominent 
symptom.  It  is  unlikely,  therefore,  to  be  met  with  so  long  as  com- 
pensation is  perfect,  but  when  the  compensatory  hypertrophy  is 
failing,  difficulty  of  respiration  and  cough  are  likely  to  be  followed 
by  indications  of  chronic  gastric  catarrh.  Similarly  with  many 
chronic  lung  diseases,  especially  with  emphysema  and  chronic  bron- 
chitis, gastritis  may  be  noted  when  the  right  side  of  the  heart 
becomes  distended,  and  the  circulation  through  the  liver  impeded. 

Chronic  diseases  of  the  liver,  which  are  associated  with  inter- 
ference in  the  portal  circulation,  are  also  frequently  marked  by 
evidence  of  disturbed  gastric  functions.  With  all  these  conditions, 
although  some  of  the  local  measures  which  will  be  mentioned  below 
may  be  adopted,  there  is  but  little  prospect  of  affording  relief, 
unless  it  is  possible  to  deal  satisfactorily  with  the  primary  disease  ; 
in  other  words,  treatment  in  which  attention  is  concentrated  upon 


CHRONIC  GASTRITIS.  171 

the  stomach  will  be  certain  to  fail,  so  long  as  the  cause  of  the  gastric 
disturbance  is  overlooked  or  is  not  satisfactorily  dealt  Avith.  Chronic 
gastritis  may  also  develop  with  severe  aneemia,  whether  the  anaemia 
forms  a  symptom  of  chlorosis,  or  results  from  some  wasting  disease, 
or  whether  it  follows  one  or  other  of  the  acute  specific  fevers  ;  under 
these  conditions  again  the  chronic  gastritis  is  only  likely  to  yield 
when  measures  for  the  correction  of  anaemia  are  simultaneously 
adopted. 

In  connection  with  phthisis,  chronic  gastritis  may  either  be  the 
result  of  the  frequent  irritation  of  the  stomach  with  expectoration 
that  has  been  swallowed,  or  it  may  be  the  expression  of  debility, 
associated  with  the  wasting  progress  of  the  disease  ;  hence  it  becomes 
important  to  ascertain,  if  possible,  to  which  of  these  causes  the  con- 
dition is  to  be  ascribed.  When  due  to  the  former,  a  few  words  of 
advice  and  some  of  the  simpler  measures  for  the  treatment  of  gas- 
tritis may  serve  to  cure  the  trouble,  but  when  it  occurs  as  a  conse- 
quence of  the  latter  condition,  it  is  far  more  difficult  to  deal  with. 
In  late  stages  of  phthisis  it  may  even  be  the  result  of  the  irritation 
produced  by  some  of  the  remedies  that  are  being  employed  in  the 
treatment  of  the  primary  disease.  The  frequency  of  gastritis  in 
connection  with  tuberculosis  is  considered  more  fully  in  another 
chapter,  together  with  the  desirability  of  changing  the  treatment 
whenever  it  appears  to  cause  gastric  irritation. 

The  occurrence  of  chronic  gastritis,  in  connection  with  organic 
diseases  of  the  stomach,  must  not  be  overlooked.  It  is  frequently 
associated  with  ulceration  of  the  stomach,  whether  the  ulceration  is 
due  to  malignant  disease,  or  whether  it  is  of  the  variety  which  has 
been  termed  simple  or  perforating  ulcer.  With  the  former  it  is 
only  possible  to  adopt  palliative  measures  for  the  relief  of  the  more 
prominent  symptoms,  and  the  outlook  is  necessarily  extremely 
gloomy.  With  chronic  non-malignant  gastric  ulcer,  however,  the 
treatment,  although  still  palliative,  can  be  pursued  more  hopefully, 
though  it  has  to  be  based  upon  the  treatment  of  gastric  ulcer,  rather 
than  upon  that  of  chronic  gastritis,  and  it  will  therefore  be  dealt 
with  more  appropriately  under  the  heading  of  Gastric  Ulcer. 

Although  it  has  been  deemed  necessary  to  indicate  the  very 
various  conditions  under  which  chronic  gastritis  may  arise,  the 
treatment  of  gastritis,  as  a  separate  affection,  is  comparatively  simple 
when  the  cause  has  been  ascertained.  The  first  object  is  naturally 
to  correct  any  errors  of  diet,  or  of  habit,  which  may  a,ppear  to  be 


172  DIGESTION. 

responsible  for  the  disordered  functions  of  tlie  stomach,  while,  if 
the  gastritis  is  due  to  disease  of  some  other  important  organ,  or 
organs,  as  above  enumerated,  these  special  diseases  must  be  treated 
at  the  same  time  that  attention  is  being  paid  to  the  gastric  functions. 

Most  commonly,  chronic  gastritis,  as  seen  in  hospital  practice,  i& 
the  result  of  excessive  indulgence  in  alcohol,  and  it  is,  of  course,, 
often  necessary  to  enforce  abstinence.  When  satisfied  that  the  gastrie 
pain  and  the  discomfort  after  food  result  from  some  such  simple 
error,  the  management  of  the  case  presents  few  difficulties.  Fre- 
quently, if  patients  will  submit  to  it,  lavage  forms  the  best  and 
quickest  mode  of  treatment,  since,  when  judiciously  performed,  it 
serves  to  remove  the  abundant  tenacious  mucus  which  is  produced 
by  the  continued  irritation  of  the  mucous  glands.  This  mucus 
seriously  impedes  the  efficacy  of  most  remedies,  and  even  when  the 
gastric  juice  is  being  secreted,  apparently  in  sufficient  quantity  and 
of  sufficiently  active  properties,  digestion  is  notwithstanding  re- 
tarded, so  long  as  the  stomach  is  clogged  up  with  this  viscid 
mucus. 

The  modern  method  of  using  lavage  consists  in  the  employment 
of  a  soft  india-rubber  tube,  which  should  be  a  yard  and  a  half  long^ 
or  somewhat  more,  and  the  diameter  of  the  lumen  should  be  from 
one-third  to  two-fifths  of  an  inch.  Near  to  the  end  which  is  ta 
be  passed  into  the  mouth,  several  lateral  openings  of  various  sizes 
should  be  made,  care  being  taken  in  making  these  openings  so  as  to 
avoid  leaving  any  sharp  edges  or  projections.  A  mark  should  be 
made  on  the  tube,  about  twenty -four  inches  from  the  end  which  has 
been  fenestrated,  this  mar]?;  indicating  the  average  distance  from  the 
incisor  teeth  to  the  cardiac  orifice  of  the  stomach.  Should  it  be 
found  that  this  tube  is  not  of  sufficient  length,  additional  tubing  can 
be  easily  affixed  with  a  short  piece  of  glass  tube.  The  glass  tube 
and  the  new  tubing  should,  however,  be  of  the  same  or  of  greater 
internal  diameter. 

The  introduction  of  the  tube  will  be  greatly  facilitated  by  thor- 
oughly moistening  it  with  water  or  with  very  dilute  glycerin.  It 
is  important  not  to  employ  oil,  or  other  greasy  material,  to  lubricate 
the  end  of  the  bube,  as  this  will  be  likely  to  excite  nausea  and  even 
vomiting.  When  the  tube  has  been  well  moistened,  the  patient  is 
instructed  to  breathe  quietly,  with  the  mouth  wide  open,  and  after 
ascertaining  that  respiration  is  being  properly  performed,  the  tube 
may  be  guided  with  the  finger-tip  to  the  posterior  portion  of  the 


CHRONIC  GASTRITIS.  173 

pharynx,  and  the  patient  is  then  directed  to  swallow,  the  tube  being 
gently  pushed  forward  as  the  act  of  swallowing  is  being  performed. 
In  this  way,  with  two  or  three  efforts  of  deglutition,  the  fenestrated 
portion  of  the  tube  may  be  safely  guided  into  the  cardiac  end  of  the 
stomach.  A  short  period  of  pause  is  then  allowed,  to  see  that  res- 
piration is  still  being  satisfactorily  effected.  During  the  introduction 
of  the  tube,  while  facilitating  the  onward  movement,  it  is  necessary 
to  be  extremely  careful  not  to  irritate  the  pharynx  by  undue  haste. 
Although  it  is  usually  easy  with  a  patient  w^ho  is  ansesthetized,  or 
otherwise  unconscious,  to  introduce  the  tube  by  external  agencies, 
any  hurry  in  endeavoring  to  force  the  tube  onward  while  the  patient 
is  conscious,  will  probably  be  attended  by  vomiting  and  retching. 

Nausea  may  occur  as  the  end  of  the  tube  reaches  the  lower  part 
of  the  oesophagus,  or  vomiting  may  follow  the  entrance  of  the  tube 
into  the  stomach,  and  although  part  of  the  object  of  the  tube  is  to 
cause  removal  of  the  contents  of  the  stomach,  it  is  very  troublesome 
when  vomiting  occurs  suddenly  in  this  way,  since  the  tube  is  almost 
certain  to  be  ejected  with  the  contents  of  the  stomach.  When,  how- 
ever, none  of  these  accidents  have  arisen,  the  next  step  is  to  procure 
the  removal  of  the  contents  of  the  stomach.  Occasionally  this  may 
be  effected  by  the  conscious  efforts  of  the  patient.  Slight  pressure 
over  the  epigastrium,  combined  with  deep  inspiration,  or  with  efforts 
to  cough,  so  that  the  contents  of  the  abdominal  cavity  are  pressed 
upon,  may  effect  speedy  evacuation  of  the  gastric  contents  through 
the  tube.  It  is,  however,  perhaps  more  satisfactory  to  use  the  tube 
as  a  siphon,  fluid  being  poured  into  the  outer  portion  of  the  tube 
through  a  large  glass  funnel  and  the  tube  being  then  pinched  be- 
tween the  fingers  so  soon  as  it  appears  that  fluid  occupies  its  whole 
length.  The  outer  end  is  then  quickly  depressed  below  the  level  of 
the  stomach,  and  when  the  constriction  of  the  tube  is  removed,  the 
contents  speedily  pour  forth  without  any  difficulty. 

It  has  been  recommended  that  lavage  should  be  effected  by  an 
aspirating  apparatus,  such  as  the  ordinary  bulb  syringe.  The  mul- 
tiplication of  apparatus  is,  however,  an  inconvenience,  and  it  is, 
usually,  wholly  unnecessary.  When  the  stomach  appears  to  be 
cleared  of  its  contents,  the  funnel  is  once  more  raised  and  filled  with 
slightly  warmed  water,  until  about  a  pint  has  passed  into  the 
stomach,  when  the  funnel  is  depressed  as  before  and  the  fluid  re- 
moved. This  operation  may  be  repeated  several  times,  until  the 
fluid  which  comes  away  is  clear  and  almost  odorless.   The  operation 


174  DIGESTION, 

may  be  rendered  more  efficient  if  the  position  of  the  patient  is 
changed  from  time  to  time,  or  if  the  length  of  the  tube  is  altered, 
so  that  the  fluid  reaches  portions  which  were  perhaps  not  previously 
thoroughly  moistened.  When  this  operation  of  lavage  is  frequently 
repeated,  patients  may  prefer  to  swallow  the  warm  water  after  the 
tube  is  already  in  position.  There  are  no  reasons  against  this  pro- 
ceeding, provided  that  warm  water  only  is  being  used ;  but  if  the 
stomach  is  being  washed  out  with  some  saline  solution,  it  is  better, 
as  a  rule,  to  introduce  it  through  the  tube,  less  nausea  being  thus 
caused. 

Saline  solutions  are  employed  when  there  is  evidence  of  much 
over-secretion  of  the  mucous  glands,  since  they  effect  detachment 
and  removal  of  viscid  mucus  more  readily  than  simple  warm  water. 
Sodium  bicarbonate  is  often  employed  in  this  way  in  the  proportion 
of  from  2  to  4  grains  to  the  ounce  of  warm  water.  Three  or  4 
grains  of  borax  may  be  substituted,  or  a  solution  of  common  salt 
may  be  used  when  the  greater  part  of  the  viscid  mucus  has  been 
removed.  As  an  antiseptic  for  washing  out  the  stomach,  Rosenheim 
employs  salicylic  acid  in  the  following  form  : 

;^. — Acidi  salicylici gr.  xviij. 

Thymolis        .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .     gr.  iv. 

Creolini  .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .     gr.  iv. 

Sodii  boratis gij. — M. 

Dissolve  in  a  quart  of  tepid  water  and  use  with  a  siphon  tube,  after  clear  water 
lavage,  once  a  day. 

In  performing  the  operation  of  lavage,  it  is  desirable  to  introduce 
the  water  somewhat  slowly,  and  also  to  effect  its  removal  gradually, 
since  there  seem  to  be  certain  risks  attendant  on  sudden  alterations 
of  pressure  within  the  stomach.  These  precautions  are  more  partic- 
ularly necessary  when  there  is  any  doubt  about  the  existence  of  an 
ulcer,  or  when  the  history  indicates  that  on  some  previous  occasion 
an  ulcer  has  existed.  With  ulceration  rapid  alterations  of  the 
dimensions  of  the  stomach  might  possibly  give  rise  to  severe  hemor- 
rhage, or  even  to  perforation.  In  some  cases  the  operation  has 
been  followed  by  rigidity  of  the  limbs  or  even  by  tetanic  convul- 
sions, but  these,  although  most  serious,  occur  rarely,  and  as  a  rule 
lavage  involves  very  little  danger,  and  indeed  very  little  discomfort 
after  the  initial  repugnance  has  been  overcome. 

This  repugnance  is,  however,  sometimes  so  extreme  that  it  is  im- 
possible to  persuade  the  patient  to  submit  to  lavage.     Under  such 


CHRONIC  GASTRITIS.  175 

circumstances  it  will  be  advisable  to  commence  treatment  with  a 
simple  emetic,  either  zinc  sulphate  or  ammonium  carbonate  ;  occa- 
sionally powdered  ipecacuanha  may  be  used,  in  doses  of  from  15  to  30 
grains  of  the  powdered  root,  followed  by  copious  draughts  of  warm 
water  until  vomiting  is  produced.  The  emetic  will  serve  not  only 
to  remove  any  source  of  irritation,  but  it  may  also  carry  up  the 
tenacious  mucus  which  is  retarding  digestion  and  favoring  fermenta- 
tion. This  cleansing  process  may  be  further  insured  by  the  ad- 
ministration of  saline  purgatives,  more  particularly  those  which  can 
be  given  with  some  alkaline  carbonate.  Many  of  the  alkaline 
mineral  waters  may  be  administered  in  this  way,  such  as  the  waters 
of  Carlsbad,  or  of  Marienbad,  or  if  these  are  not  available,  the  arti- 
ficial Carlsbad  salt  may  be  used.  This  should  contain  16  parts  of 
sodium  sulphate  with  2  parts  of  sodium  carbonate  and  1  of  sodium 
chloride  ;  the  dose  will  vary  with  the  habits  of  the  individual. 
When  employing  this  artificial  Carlsbad  salt,  it  is  desirable  to  give 
it  in  the  early  morning  before  food  has  been  taken,  and  to  mix  it 
with  a  fairly  large  quantity  of  water  ;  the  activity  is  thus  increased, 
and  the  stomach  is  generally  emptied  very  completely.  The  ad- 
vantage of  the  presence  of  the  alkaline  carbonate  is  that  it  counter- 
acts any  undue  acidity  of  the  gastric  contents,  and  to  some  extent 
facilitates  the  removal  of  mucus. 

The  further  treatment  of  chronic  gastritis  must  to  a  large  extent 
be  symptomatic,  that  is,  the  treatment  must  vary  Avith  the  promi- 
nence of  special  symptoms  associated  with  this  disease  ;  for  while  it 
is  desirable  to  check  fermentation,  the  symptomatic  treatment  must, 
notwithstanding,  be  pursued  sunultaneously.  Fermentation  may 
sometimes  be  arrested  by  the  employment  of  creosote,  which  may 
be  given  in  small  doses  of  from  1  to  3  minims  in  capsule  ;  or  it 
may  be  administered  as  a  pill,  in  mixture,  or  in  solution.  In 
smaller  doses  of  from  J  to  1  minim,  it  may  be  given  after  meals  to 
arrest  gastric  fermentation.  Resorcin  has  often  been  employed 
with  the  same  object  in  doses  of  from  3  to  8  grains  ;  this  drug 
requires  free  dilution  with  water,  and  should  be  flavored  with 
glycerin,  or  with  syrup  of  orange.  It  has  the  disadvantage  of 
occasionally  producing  profuse  perspiration  ;  hence  it  is  not  a  desir- 
able drug  to  employ  in  full  dose,  unless  the  patient  is  sufficiently 
ill  to  be  kept  in  bed.  Small  doses  of  thymol  (J  to  2  grains)  may  be 
administered,  either  as  a  pill  Avith  powdered  soap,  or  in  solution 
with  oil,  or  with  water  ;  thymol  is  occasionally  of  considerable  ser- 


176  DIGESTION. 

vice  in  checking  fermentative  processes  and  in  favoring  the  removal 
of  collections  of  flatus. 

When  there  is  much  complaint  of  pain,  or  when  there  is  a  fre- 
quent tendency  to  vomit,  silver  nitrate  is  occasionally  of  great  ser- 
vice. It  can  be  given  as  a  pill  in  doses  of  from  ^^  to  J  grain. 
Martindale  recommends  that  kaolin  ointment  should  be  used  as  an 
excipient,  instead  of  bread  crumb,  since  the  latter  contains  salt 
which  decomposes  the  silver  nitrate.  It  is  perhaps  scarcely  neces- 
sary to  point  out  that  silver  nitrate  should  not  be  given  in  conjunc- 
tion with  creosote  or  guaiacol.  For  the  relief  of  pain,  however,  it 
is  more  usual  to  employ  one  or  other  of  the  bismuth  compounds, 
the  insoluble  salts  being  preferred.  These  are  most  efficacious  when 
given  suspended  in  mucilage  two  hours  or  more  after  food  has  been 
taken,  so  that  the  influence  of  the  bismuth  is  brought  to  bear  upon 
the  mucous  membrane  as  intimately  as  possible.  The  administra- 
tion of  the  bismuth  compounds  at  the  commencement  of  the  treat- 
ment of  chronic  gastritis  will  very  often  produce  very  little  benefit, 
since  the  mucous  membrane  must  first  be  cleared  of  viscid  mucus. 
Sometimes  the  bismuth  salts  are  given  with  an  alkaline  carbonate, 
the  latter  being  intended  to  neutralize  the  acidity  and  to  favor  the 
removal  of  mucus.  In  such  combination,  it  is  necessary  to  remem- 
ber that  bismuth  subnitrate  cannot  be  used  on  account  of  its  acid 
properties.  As  in  acute  gastritis,  I  certainly  prefer  bismuth  salicyl- 
ate, since  this  checks  fermentative  processes  and  also  allays  eructa- 
tion. When,  however,  the  chief  complaint  is  of  pain,  and  when 
there  appears  to  be  but  little  distention  after  the  administration  of 
food,  bismuth  oxide  or  subcarbonate  may  give  very  good  results.  For 
the  relief  of  pain,  they  may  be  associated  with  diluted  hydrocyanic 
acid,  which  is  so  feebly  acid  that  it  will  not  break  up  the  bismuth 
compounds.  In  severe  gastritis  the  soluble  preparations  of  bismuth 
usually  do  not  act  well,  although  they  may  be  used  when  some  prog- 
ress toward  recovery  has  been  made.  When,  however,  the  symp- 
toms are  severe,  it  is  desirable  to  employ  the  insoluble  compounds 
of  bismuth  in  full  doses  of  20  grains  or  more. 

In  some  few  selected  cases,  benefit  will  result  from  the  use  of 
opium,  more  particularly  when  the  gastritis  is  associated  with  any 
tendency  to  vomiting.  This  drug  has  to  be  employed  with  great 
caution,  since  it  will,  if  used  too  long  or  in  too  large  quantity,  favor 
constipation,  which  it  is  most  desirable  to  avoid,  and  in  so  doing,  it 
may  also  favor  a  continuance  of  nausea  and  vomiting. 


CHRONIC  GASTRITIS.  177 

The  following  prescription  may  prove  useful  : 

R. — Morphinse  hydrochloi'atis        .         .         .         .         .  gr.  ^. 

Acidi  hydrocyanici  diluti 1Tl,iv. 

Syrupi 3J. 

Mucilaginis  acacise.         .         .         .         .       q.  s.  ad  §j. 

T.  d.  s. 

When  gastritis  is  dependent  upon  alcoholism,  considerable  benefit 
often  follows  the  employment  of  the  bitter  tonics.  Calumba  and 
quassia,  which  contain  no  tannin,  are  the  drugs  most  commonly  em- 
ployed, and  they  may  be  given  as  the  infusion,  in  conjunction  with 
diluted  hydrocyanic  acid,  or  together  with  one  or  other  of  the  alka- 
lies. The  same  class  of  cases  will  often  show  improvement  during 
the  administration  of  gentian,  the  compound  tincture,  or  the  com- 
pound infusion,  being  frequently  of  great  service ;  as  a  rule,  these 
should  be  given  with  alkalies,  though  sometimes  they  appear  to  be 
effectual  if  mixed  with  some  aromatic  preparation,  such  as  cinnamon, 
capsicum,  or  ginger. 

In  milder  cases,  alkalies  are  frequently  beneficial.  The  value  of 
alkalies  in  the  treatment  of  chronic  gastritis  is  well  recognized,  not 
only  amongst  members  of  the  medical  profession,  but  also  by  the 
public.  Numerous  sufferers  from  chronic  dyspepsia  are  in  the  habit 
of  dosing  themselves  with  small  quantities  of  sodium  bicarbonate 
with,  or  shortly  after,  their  meals,  and  it  is  generally  held  that  when 
used  in  this  way  it  serves  to  allay  heartburn.  With  this  object  it 
may  be  given  in  medicinal  doses  of  from  10  to  20  grains,  or  more, 
if  by  itself,  but  the  dose  is  naturally  reduced  when  employed  with 
other  remedies.  The  sodium  bicarbonate  serves  not  only  to  neutral- 
ize any  free  acid  which  has  been  formed  within  the  stomach,  sach 
as  lactic  or  butyric  acid,  but  it  also  appears,  to  a  great  extent,  to 
retard  and  even  to  prevent  the  morbid  fermentation  which  accom- 
panies decomposition  of  undigested  food. 

Lemoine^  advises  the  administration  of  large  doses  of  alkalies  at 
the  moment  that  digestion  is  supposed  to  finish,  shortly  before  the 
usual  hour  for  discomfort.     He  gives  for  each  dose 

R. — Sodii  bicarbonatis  .......     gr.  xl. 

Lithii  carbonatis     .......     gr.  iij. 

in  a  cachet.     This  is  swallowed  with  half  a  tumbler  of  tepid  Vichy 
water  about  11  a.m.,  3  p.m.,  6  p.m.,  and  10  p.m. 

'  Nord  Medicale,  February  1,  1895. 
12 


178  DIGESTION. 

If  there  is  any  diarrhoea,  such  as  not  infrequently  takes  place 
after  meals,  the  contents  of  each  cachet  are  altered  as  follows  : 

ii .  — Sodii  bicarbonatis  .         .         .         .         .         .         .     gr.  xl. 

Calci  phosphatis gr.  xv. 

Cretse  prseparatse     .         .         .         .         .         .         .     gr.  x. 

And  if  the  diarrhoea  is  fetid,  internal  disinfectants  should  be 
added : 

H  ■  — Sodii  bicarbonatis  .         .         .         .         .         .         .  gr.  xl. 

Benzo-naphthol      .......  gr.  x. 

Bismuthi  salicylatis        .         .         .         .         .         .  gr.  vij. 

Pulveris  opii .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .  gr.  J. 

Smaller  amounts  are  sometimes  given  before  meals  to  promote 
the  secretion  of  gastric  juice  ;  when  given  after  meals  the  possibility 
of  neutralizing  the  natural  free  acid  of  gastric  juice  must  not  be 
overlooked,  since,  if  sodium  bicarbonate  is  used  too  freely,  and 
especially  if  used  when  fermentative  processes  are  not  going  on,  it 
may  promote  dyspepsia  and  retard  digestion  by  checking  the  activity 
of  the  gastric  juice. 

The  value  of  alkalines  in  favoring  the  detachment  of  the  viscid 
mucus,  which  so  often  covers  the  gastric  mucous  membrane,  has 
already  been  referred  to.  For  this  purpose  alkalies  of  greater 
strength  are  sometimes  employed  ;  in  fact,  when  there  is  great  secre- 
tion of  mucus,  few  remedies  are  as  serviceable  as  the  free  alkalies, 
such  as  liquor  potassse,  which  may  be  given  in  doses  of  from  10  to 
30  minims  well  diluted.  When  employed  with  this  object  liquor 
potassse  should  be  taken  on  an  empty  stomach,  but  unless  suffi- 
ciently diluted  it  may  do  far  more  harm  than  good.  Magnesia  is 
frequently  given,  together  with  sodium  bicarbonate.  Ten  grains  of 
eacli  may  be  administered,  either  in  powder,  or  in  mixture,  toward 
the  end  of  the  meal.  The  magnesia  appears  to  assist  the  sodium  in 
neutralizing  any  free  acid  contained  in  the  stomach. 

Since  the  antiseptic  value  of  salicylic  acid  has  been  recognized, 
both  salicylic  acid  and  sodium  salicylate  have  been  largely  employed 
in  the  treatment  of  chronic  gastritis.  Preference  is  usually  given 
to  the  sodium  salicylate,  since  this  drug  appears  to  be  broken  up 
into  its  component  parts  by  the  free  acid  encountered  in  the  stomach, 
and  to  exert  there  the  antiseptic  effects  of  salicylic  acid,  together 
with  the  virtues  of  the  alkaline  salt  which  is  immediately  formed. 
Sodium  salicylate  and  salicylic  acid  share,  with  other  compounds  of 


CHRONIC  GASTRITIS.  179 

sodium,  the  disadvantage  of  favoring  dyspepsia  if  their  use  is  too 
long  continued,  especially  if  they  are  used  in  comparatively  large 
doses,  and  hence  it  becomes  important  to  check  their  administration 
from  time  to  time,  when  the  discomfort  for  which  they  have  been 
originally  employed  seems  to  be  under  control. 

It  is  well  known  that  some  forms  of  chronic  gastritis  do  not  im- 
prove under  treatment  with  alkalies,  while  they  speedily  show  signs 
of  amelioration  so  soon  as  moderate  doses  of  acids  are  employed, 
and  perhaps  one  of  the  most  troublesome  problems  connected  with 
gastritis  is  to  determine  the  particular  case  in  which  acids,  instead 
of  alkalies,  are  to  be  preferred.  Some  authors  go  so  far  as  to  advise 
the  routine  employment  of  acids  in  almost  all  cases  of  chronic  gas- 
tritis. Ewald,  in  particular,  recommends  the  administration  of 
large  doses  of  hydrochloric  acid.  In  my  own  experience,  however, 
with  a  very  large  number  of  dyspeptics,  seen  in  out-patient  practice, 
the  majority  improved  so  greatly  during  the  administration  of  alkalies 
that  it  is,  in  my  opinion,  better  in  general  to  commence  with  prep- 
arations of  sodium,  or  magnesium,  instead  of  with  free  acids.  From 
time  to  time,  however,  the  free  acids  appear  to  be  called  for,  and 
.they  are  more  especially  indicated  when  distention  after  food  is 
increased  during  the  employment  of  alkalies.  Acids  are  also  service- 
able in  dealing  with  the  gastritis  of  convalescence  from  an  acute 
disease,  though  the  first  symptoms  are  best  treated  with  alkalies,  the 
acids  being  reserved  for  administration  with  quinine,  or  with  other 
vegetable  bitters,  so  soon  as  the  urgency  of  the  symptoms  has  been 
overcome.  Even  when  the  consumption  of  food  is  followed,  within 
a  short  time,  by  discomfort  from  the  formation  of  a  considerable 
amount  of  gas  in  the  stomach,  dilute  hydrochloric  acid  may  cause 
considerable  relief,  although  on  the  other  hand  these  are  essentially 
the  conditions  which  so  often  yield  to  the  administration  of  alkalies. 
The  method  of  operation  is  somewhat  uncertain.  The  free  acid  may 
perhaps  check  the  growth  of  micro-organisms  which  favor  the  evolu- 
tion of  gas,  or  it  may  actually  assist  in  the  digestion  of  food  by 
facilitating  the  action  of  the  gastric  juice  ;  in  fact,  it  may  be  assumed 
that  in  such  cases  the  gastric  juice  is  deficient  in  free  hydrochloric 
acid. 

The  efficacy  of  the  acid  may  occasionally  be  increased  by  the 
simultaneous  administration  of  pepsin.  This  remedy  was  formerly 
recommended  in  the  British  Pharmacopoeia,  in  a  dose  of  from  2  to 
5  grains  only  ;  the  present  British  Pharmacopoeia,  however,  recom- 


180  DIGESTION. 

mends  the  administration  of  from  5  to  10  grains,  which  may  be 
given  either  in  a  pill  with  glycerin,  or  wrapped  in  wafer  paper,  or 
even  sprinkled  over  the  food  in  the  form  of  powder.  Pepsin  may 
also  be  administered  as  the  glycerate  of  pepsin,  which  can  be  given 
in  doses  of  from  1  to  2  fluidrachms.  This  preparation  contains  5 
grains  of  pepsin  to  each  fluidrachm,  together  with  a  small  propor- 
tion of  hydrochloric  acid  ;  the  latter  is  employed  to  effect  the  solu- 
tion of  pepsin.  Too  prolonged  use  of  hydrochloric  acid,  especially 
when  it  is  given  in  conjunction  with  pepsin,  is  liable  to  be  followed 
by  diminution  of  the  secretion  of  gastric  juice  ;  hence,  as  when  using 
alkalies,  it  is  advisable  to  check  the  administration  after  two  or 
three  weeks,  and  if  the  symptoms  still  persist,  to  resume  it  after  an 
interval  of  from  one  to  two  weeks. 

When  it  has  been  decided  to  employ  acids  the  time  of  adminis- 
tration is  a  matter  of  some  importance.  On  theoretical  grounds  it 
should  be  easy  to  determine  whether  the  acid  is  to  be  given  before 
or  after  meals.  Thus,  it  has  been  asserted  that,  when  the  eructa- 
tions are  decidedly  acid  and  occur  almost  immediately  after  eating, 
there  is  evidence  of  over-secretion  of  the  acid  elements  of  the  gastric 
juice,  and  the  administration  of  the  acid  before  meals  is  therefore 
indicated,  since  it  will  thus  diminish  the  secretion  of  gastric  juice  : 
while  with  ordinary  mild  acid  dyspepsia,  or  when  alkaline  eructa- 
tions occur,  the  acid  is  best  administered  after  eating.  In  practice, 
however,  it  is  found  that  it  is  impossible  to  follow  any  such  hard- 
and-fast  rule,  since  the  conditions  above  mentioned  are  rarely 
strongly  differentiated.  It  is  therefore  advisable  that  in  every  case 
the  acid,  in  the  first  instance,  should  be  given  before  food,  and  if  no 
benefit  results  the  effect  of  its  administration  after  meals  should 
first  be  tried  before  determining  on  any  change  of  treatment.  It  is 
perhaps  scarcely  necessary  to  add  that,  during  the  administration  of 
hydrochloric  acid,  free  alkalies,  or  salts  of  silver,  should  not  be  given, 
since  these  will  undergo  undesirable  chemical  changes. 

The  following  prescriptions  for  mixtures  to  be  taken  twice  or 
thrice  daily,  culled  from  the  pharmacopoeias  of  different  London 
hospitals,  are  frequently  employed  in  the  treatment  of  various  phases 
of  chronic  gastritis  : 

R. — Acidi  liydrocyanici  diluti        .....  Uliij. 

Sodii  bicarbonatis  .         .         .         .         .         .         .  gr.  x. 

Tincturse  belladonnje Hlvj. 

Infusi  calumbse       .         .         .         .         .       q.  s.  ad  ^j. 


G HBO  NIG  GASTRITIS. 


181 


U. — Acidi  hydrocyanici  diluti 
Sodii  bicarbonatis  . 
Aquse     .         .      '   . 

K. — Sodii  bicarbonatis  . 

Acidi  hydrocyanici  dilati 
Infusi  gentianse  compositi 

R. — Sodii  bicarbonatis  . 

Tincturfe  nucis  vomicae  . 

Chloroformi  . 

Infusi  rhei 

Infasi  gentianse  compositi 

R. — Sodii  bicarbonatis  . 

Tincture  gentianse  compositse 
Spiritus  chloroformi 
Aquae  menthae  piperitae  . 

R .  — Sodii  bicarbonatis  . 
Ammonii  carbonatis 
Infusi  gentianse  compositi 

R. — Spiritus  ammoniae  aromatici 
Sodii  bicarbonatis  . 
Infusi  gentianae  compositi 

R. — Pulveris  rhei 

Pulveris  calumbae  . 
Sodii  bicarbonatis  . 
Aquae  menthae  piperitae 

R. — Pulveris  rhei 

Ammonii  carbonatis 

Infusi  quassiae 

Aquae  menthae  piperitae 

R. — Pulveris  rhei 

Sodii  bicarbonatis  . 
Ammonii  carbonatis 
Pulveris  zingiberis 
Magnesi  sulphatis  . 
Aquae  menthae  piperitae 

R. — Pulveris  rhei 

Sodii  bicarbonatis  . 
Spiritus  ammoniae  aromatici 
Infusi  calumbae 

R. — Pulveris  rhei 

Ammonii  carbonatis 
Sodii  bicarbonatis  . 
Aquae  menthae  piperitae 


s,  ad 


s.  ad 


gr.  X. 

gr.  X. 
TTiijss. 

gr.  X. 
n\,x. 

fss. 

gr.  X. 

gss. 

gr.  XX. 
gr.  iij. 


.     TiLxx. 
•     gr.  X. 
s.  ad     Ij. 

gr.  V. 
gr.  X. 
gr.  X. 

§j- 

gr.  iv. 

gr.  ij. 

§ss. 

gr.  iij. 
gr.  X. 
gr.  iij. 
gr.  iij. 
gr.  X. 

gr.  V. 
gr.  X. 

3ss. 

Ij- 

gr.  iv. 
gr.  iij. 
gr.  X, 

iJ- 


s.  ad 


s.  ad 


s.  ad 


182 


DIGESTION. 


R .  — Acidi  hydrociilorici  diluti 
Infusi  gentianEe  compositi 

R .  — Acidi  hydrochlorici  diluti 

Tincturge  gentianse  compositse 
Spiritus  chloroforrai 
Aquse     .         .      •  . 

R. — Acidi  sulphurici  aromatici 
Spiritus  chloroformi 
Infusi  gentianje  compositi 


s.  ad 


s.  ad 


s.  ad 


3ss. 


CHAPTER   VIII. 


DIGESTION—  Continued. 


Gastric   Ulcer — Hsematemesis — Perforation — Cancer   of   the  Stomach — Lavage — 
Antiseptics — Sedatives — Gastric  Neuroses  :  Gastralgia  or  Gastrodjnia. 

Gastric  Ulcer.  Two  very  distinct  forms  of  gastric  ulcer  occur 
under  markedly  different  conditions.  The  one  which  it  is  proposed 
to  deal  with  now  is  the  simple  round  or  chronic  ulcer,  to  which  the 
name  ^'perforating  ulcer"  has  been  given,  while  the  other  is  that 
associated  with  malignant  disease  of  the  stomach.  The  former 
occurs  mainly  in  early  adult  life,  more  particularly  in  young  females, 
especially  among  servants  from  the  ages  of  eighteen  to  twenty-five, 
who  may  be  in  the  habit  of  taking  their  meals  hurriedly  and  masti- 
cating them  i'liperfectly.  It  also  arises  among  those  who  are  in  the 
habit  of  drinking  tea  or  coffee  at  too  high  a  temperature.  The 
ulcer  of  malignant  disease  more  commonly  arises  later  in  life,  between 
the  ages  of  forty-five  and  sixty,  and  although  to  some  extent  the 
symptoms  resemble  those  of  simple  ulcer,  there  are  more  commonly 
indications  of  obstruction  at  the  pyloric  orifice,  a  symptom  from 
which  those  suffering  from  simple  ulcer  are  comparatively  free. 

The  early  symptoms  of  gastric  ulcer  are  frequently  somewhat 
obscure,  and  iiiany  cases,  where  the  evidence  is  comparatively  slight, 
have  to  be  treated  on  a  provisional  diagnosis,  the  fact  being  that 
ulceration  is  almost  invariably  attended  by  symptoms  of  chronic 
gastric  catarrh,  which  may  precede  the  definite  indications  of  gastric 
ulcer.  The  distinct  indications  of  ulceration  are  the  occurrence  of 
hemorrhage,  which  may  be  large  in  amoimt ;  the  occurrence  of 
vomiting,  which  may  ensue  every  time  that  solid  food  has  been 
taken  ;  and  the  existence  of  pain  in  the  epigastrium,  which  may 
occasionally  be  relieved  for  a  short  time  after  the  administration  of 
food,  though  more  commonly  food  is  apt  to  render  the  pain  more 
severe.  To  these  symptoms  may  be  added  the  existence  of  pain  on 
pressure,  Avhich  may  be  very  acute  over  a  limited  area.  It  will  be 
noted  that  many  of  the  above  indications  may  occur  with  acute  or 
chronic  gastritis,  and  when  it  is  added  that  there  is  usually  a  com- 


184  DIGESTION. 

plaint  of  pyrosis,  and  perhaps  of  palpitation  and  distention  after 
meals,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  difficulty  of  diagnosis  is  increased. 

The  treatment  of  gastric  ulcer  will  depend  upon  the  prominent 
symptoms  at  the  time  when  the  case  first  comes  under  observation. 
Thus,  for  example,  hemorrhage  occasionally  occurs  suddenly,  with 
but  little  warning,  and  may  be  so  profuse  as  to  cause  the  patient  to 
become  pale  and  pulseless.  It  is  not  uncommon,  in  hospital  prac- 
tice, for  patients  to  be  brought  under  treatment  after  a  severe  attack 
of  hsematemesis,  where  all  the  earlier  symptoms  of  gastric  ulcer  have 
been  practically  ignored.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  in  this  con- 
dition, although  there  are  clear  indications  for  treatment,  the  treat- 
ment must  be  symptomatic  ;  the  point  aimed  at  being  the  arrest  of 
hemorrhage,  or  the  prevention  of  a  recurrence  of  hemorrhage,  which 
may  be  best  effected  by  promoting  the  healing  of  the  ulcer.  On 
the  other  hand,  when  the  evidences  of  gastric  ulcer  are  somewhat 
more  indefinite,  when  there  are  frequent  vomiting  and  some  pain, 
although  efforts  must  be  primarily  directed  to  the  relief  of  these 
prominent  symptoms,  yet  real  benefit  is  best  secured  by  measures 
calculated  to  promote  the  healing  and  cicatrization  of  the  ulcer. 

When  there  appears  to  be  no  reasonable  cause  for  doubt  that  the 
case  is  one  of  simple  gastric  ulcer,  it  is  generally  advisable  to  pro- 
mote healing  by  limiting  the  movements  of  the  stomach,  and  by 
diminishing  its  work.  With  these  objects  the  patient  should  be 
kept  in  bed,  if  possible,  for  a  week  or  more,  a  course  which  is 
naturally  imperative  when  heematemesis  has  occurred.  Rest  in  bed 
is  desirable,  not  only  in  order  to  check  the  movements  of  the  body, 
and  therefore  the  degree  of  strain  which  may  be  put  upon  the  Aveak- 
ened  wall  of  the  stomach,  but  also  on  account  of  the  fact  that  less 
food  is  needed  when  muscular  work  is  not  being  performed.  It  is 
desirable,  in  these  cases,  either  to  discontinue  the  consumption  of 
food  by  the  mouth,  or,  when  the  symptoms  are  less  urgent,  consider- 
ably to  diminish  the  amount  that  is  thus  taken,  and  comfort  will 
therefore  be  increased  when  the  sense  of  hunger  and  the  need  of 
food  are  reduced.  When  hemorrhage  has  occurred,  it  is  essential  to 
check  the  administration  of  food  by  the  mouth,  and  to  feed  entirely 
with  nutrient  enemata.  These  should  be  given  for  a  period  of  three 
to  five  days,  or  more,  if  they  continue  to  be  retained.  Frequently, 
however,  it  will  be  found  that  after  the  third  day,  especially  when 
there  has  been  no  further  hsematemesis,  pain  is  so  far  relieved  as  to 
permit  the  administration  of  liquid  food  by  the  mouth. 


QASTBIQ  ULCER.  185 

During  the  early  period  of  the  disease  there  may  be  complaint  of 
thirst,  and  inasinuch  as  the  amount  of  liquid  which  can  be  con- 
veniently absorbed  from  the  rectum  is  very  limited,  other  measures 
besides  enemata  must  be  adopted  for  allaying  the  sense  of  thirst. 
The  most  beneficial  is  the  frequent  administration  of  small  quantities 
of  ice-cold  water  ;  half  an  ounce  or  so  maybe  taken  every  half -ho  ur^ 
or,  if  the  patient  prefers,  small  lumps  of  ice  may  be  sucked.  Ice  is 
of  great  service  when  employed  in  this  way,  since  it  not  only  allays 
thirst,  but  also  reduces  the  sensibility  of  the  stomach,  and  thus  re- 
lieves pain.  When  it  is  deemed  safe  to  resume  the  introduction  of 
food  into  the  stomach,  it  should  be  given  in  the  liquid  form,  and 
small  quantities  only  should  be  administered.  During  the  early 
days,  from  2  to  4  ounces  of  liquid  food  may  be  given  every  three  or 
four  hours,  and  since  it  is  desirable  to  minimize  the  work  and  the 
movements  of  the  stomach,  the  food  should  be  pre-digested  by  the 
use  of  peptonizing  powders,  or  of  pancreatic  emulsions.  When  the 
patient  is  able  to  take  milk,  the  safety  of  administration  is  greatly 
increased  by  dilution.  The  discomfort  which  generally  arises 
during  the  early  stages  of  feeding  by  the  mouth  may  also  be  dimin- 
ished if  alkalies  are  added  to  the  milk.  Fifteen  grains  of  sodium 
bicarbonate  and  5  grains  of  magnesia  may  be  added  to  every  4 
ounces  of  the  diluted  mixture.  This  alkaline  mixture  may  be  ad- 
ministered every  two  or  three  hours,  and  when  it  is  found  that  it 
can  be  taken  without  pain,  and  that  the  appetite  is  returning  and 
the  patient  is  craving  for  more  food,  the  milk  may  be  rendered 
more  nutritious,  either  by  being  thickened  with  finely  powdered 
stale  bread,  or  by  being  mixed  with  yolk  of  egg  which  has  been 
well  beaten  up.  To  this,  a  few  days  later,  may  be  added  minced 
chicken,  or  minced  veal ;  only  a  small  quantity  must  be  given  at  a 
time  during  the  first  few  days,  and  the  results  of  this  increased 
dietary  must  be  carefully  noted. 

When  the  patient  complains  that  milk  appears  to  disagree,  con- 
centrated beef  tea,  or  eggs,  may  be  employed  in  lieu  of  milk  ;  should 
this  intolerance  of  milk  occur  early  in  the  course  of  treatment,  it 
may  be  even  necessary  to  substitute  beef  tea,  or  chicken  broth,  and 
to  entirely  discard  the  milk  dietary.  As  improvement  progresses 
the  sense  of  thirst  may  be  allayed  by  permitting  a  small  teacupful 
of  weak  tea  occasionally,  but  this  should  be  mixed  with  a  fairly  large 
proportion  of  milk,  and  it  should  be  given  at  a  tolerably  low  tem- 
perature. 


186  DIGESTION, 

In  less  severe  cases — that  is,  when  the  existence  of  a  gastric  ulcer 
is  only  suspected  from  the  pain,  or  from  the  vomiting,  although  there 
may  have  been  no  hemorrhage — it  may  be  very  difficult  to  enforce 
the  routine  of  diet  and  treatment  above  indicated ;  and,  indeed,  it 
may  be  found  necessary  to  treat  the  case  as  though  it  were  merely 
one  of  severe  chronic  gastritis.  The  symptoms  are  those  of  gastritis 
in  an  exaggerated  form,  and  therefore  the  existence  of  a  large  quan- 
tity of  viscid  mucus  within  the  stomach  may  be  inferred,  partly 
from  the  discomfort,  and  partly  from  the  eructations.  To  relieve 
these  symptoms  sodium  bicarbonate  and  sodium  chloride  may  be 
given  together,  or  sodium  sulphate  may  be  added  to  the  mixture,  so 
as  to  form  the  artificial  Carlsbad  salt  already  described.  This  alka- 
line mixture  may  be  well  diluted  with  warm  water,  and  it  is  often 
most  efficacious  if  administered  in  the  early  morning  when  fasting. 
A  teaspoonful  of  Carlsbad  salts  may  be  given  in  half  a  tumblerful 
of  warm  water  every  ten  minutes,  until  four  doses  have  been  taken, 
and  no  food  should  be  allowed  within  at  least  half  an  hour  of  the 
last  dose.  Although  the  treatment  in  general  is  similar  to  that  of 
chronic  gastritis,  it  is  dangerous,  when  an  ulcer  is  suspected,  to  use 
lavage,  or  to  encourage  vomiting,  since  during  the  former  the  sur- 
face of  the  ulcer  may  be  damaged  in  the  introduction  of  the  tube, 
while  if  vomiting  is  encouraged  a  strain  is  necessarily  put  upon  the 
vessels  of  the  ulcer  during  the  act  of  vomiting,  thus  increasing  the 
risks  of  hemorrhage.  The  whole  treatment  should  be  as  sedative 
and  as  soothing  as  possible,  and  medicinal  treatment  should  be 
adopted  to  check  any  tendency  to  vomiting. 

The  drugs  which  are  of  most  service  for  affording  a  protective 
covering  to  the  ulcer  are  the  insoluble  salts  of  bismuth.  These  are 
best  administered  when  fasting,  and  they  appear  to  be  far  more 
efficacious  if  given  in  suspension  in  a  fairly  large  quantity  of  liquid. 
When  giving  bismuth  salts,  however,  it  is  necessary  to  remember 
their  constipating  effect,  and  to  counteract  this  by  the  simultaneous 
administration  of  some  alkaline  or  saline  purge.  Magnesia  or  mag- 
nesium carbonate  may  be  given  with  bismuth  subcarbonate  or  with 
bismuth  salicylate,  but,  when  using  the  subnitrate,  it  is  better  to 
employ  sodium  sulphate.  To  be  of  much  service,  bismuth  compounds 
should  be  given  in  full  doses  of  20  grains  and  upward.  If  the  symp- 
toms of  gastritis  are,  however,  less  urgent,  smaller  doses  may  be 
administered,  and  their  sedative  action  may  be  increased  by  com- 
bining  them  with   diluted  hydrocyanic  acid,  or  with  one  of   the 


GASTBIG  ULGER.  187 

soluble  preparations  of  opium,  such  as  the  compound  or  the  simple 
tincture.  The  preparations  of  opium  will,  however,  increase  the 
tendency  to  constipation,  and,  in  spite  of  the  relief  which  they  afford, 
will  necessitate  watchful  care  and  the  frequent  employment  of 
laxatives. 

When  the  symptoms  are  not  urgent,  preparations  of  iron  are  often 
beneficial  The  sulphate,  the  carbonate,  and  non-astringent  prep- 
arations are  preferable  to  ferric  chloride,  which  may  increase  pain 
owing  to  the  free  acid  it  contains.  It  has  already  been  indicated 
that  gastric  ulcer  is  very  likely  to  occur  among  chlorotic  women, 
and  the  iron  salts  will,  therefore,  assist  in  counteracting  anaemia  ; 
they  will  also  favor  coagulability  of  the  blood,  which  will  assist  in 
preventing  hemorrhage.  During  the  administration  of  the  bismuth 
compounds,  iron  may  be  given  conveniently  in  the  official  pill  of 
aloes  and  iron,  which  should  be  taken  at  bedtime. 

The  treatment  of  cases  marked  by  hemorrhage  must,  to  some 
extent,  depend  upon  the  quantity  of  blood  lost ;  but  when  hemor- 
rhage has  once  occurred,  even  though  it  may  have  been  slight,  the 
patient  must  be  kept  absolutely  at  rest,  since  the  loss  of  a  small 
amount  is  very  commonly  the  precursor  of  a  more  severe  hemor- 
rhage, and  the  treatment  already  mentioned,  of  feeding  by  enemata, 
of  giving  iced  water,  or  ice  to  suck,  and  of  applying  cold  over  the 
epigastrium,  must  be  rigidly  followed  for  some  days.  It  is  not 
advisable,  with  recent  hemorrhage,  to  give  medicines  by  the  mouth, 
as  the  chief  object  of  treatment  is  to  allay  gastric  irritation.  Some- 
times, however,  there  is  much  advantage  not  only  in  the  employ- 
ment of  morphine  subcutaneously,  to  relieve  pain  and  to  promote 
quiet,  but  also  in  the  administration  of  the  hypodermatic  injection 
of  ergot,  of  which  from  3  to  10  minims  may  be  given,  according  to 
the  gravity  of  the  case.  This  extract  should  be  freshly  prepared 
shortly  before  its  employment.  The  ordinary  astringents,  such 
as  ferric  chloride  or  other  astringent  preparations  of  iron  and  tan- 
nic acid,  or  gallic  acid,  are,  as  a  rule,  better  avoided  with  recent 
hsematemesis. 

As  in  the  treatment  of  haemoptysis,  it  is  better  to  administer  ergot 
in  repeated  small  doses  by  subcutaneous  injection  than  in  a  single 
large  dose.  In  this  way  the  continuous  effect  of  ergot  is  obtained, 
and  there  is  also  the  advantage  of  the  moral  effect  upon  the  patient 
and  his  friends,  who  might  perhaps  otherwise  feel  alarmed  at  the 
apparent  inactivity  of  the  treatment. 


188  DIGESTION. 

In  a  clinical  lecture,  Robin,  of  Paris,^  details  the  measures  whicli 
he  recommends  on  being  summoned  to  a  patient  who  is  vomiting 
blood  in  large  quantity.  The  patient  should  be  put  to  bed  at  once 
with  his  head  low,  lying  on  his  back  ;  ergotin  should  be  injected 
hypodermatically  over  the  epigastrium,  and  ice  applied  to  the  same 
region.  One  or  two  grains  of  extract  of  opium  should  be  given  at 
once,  and  every  two  hours  one  tablespoonful  of  the  following 
mixture  : 


R. — Extract!  ergots;  fluidi 
Acidi  gallici  . 
Tincturse  opii  deodorati 
Syrupi  terebinthinje 
Aquse  auranti  floris 


.     gr.  XXX. 
ad     fvj. 


This   mixture   should   be   continued  until  the  hemorrhasre  has 


fc>^ 


entirely  ceased.  If  obstinate  vomiting  continues,  which  may  tend 
to  keep  up  or  increase  the  hemorrhage,  he  recommends  from  8  to  10 
drops  of  the  following  mixture  in  a  little  water  :  Picrotoxin  and 
morphine  hydrochlorate,  of  each  1  gr.  ;  atropine  sulphate,  1  gr.  ; 
ergotin,  15  gr.  ;  distilled  water,  4  dr.  ;  and  sufficient  alcohol  to 
effect  solution.  He  further  points  out  that  the  blood  which  has 
been  shed,  but  is  not  vomited,  is  apt  to  undergo  decomposition  in 
the  stomach  or  the  bowel,  especially  if  the  patient  is  constipated. 
An  auto-intoxication  may  thereby  be  set  up,  and  the  tongue  becomes 
furred  and  the  breath  offensive.  This  condition  may  be  dealt  with 
by  enemata  and  by  purgatives. 

The  use  of  calcium  chloride  to  arrest  hemorrhage,  internal  or 
external,  has  often  been  urged  by  Professor  Wright,  of  Netley. 
Parry  (Lancet,  July  16,  1898)  describes  a  case  of  gastro-intestinal 
hemorrhage  in  a  newly  born  child  an  event  of  obscure  pathology 
which  is  commonly  fatal.  On  the  second  day  of  the  bleeding  eight 
doses  of  5  gr.  of  calcium  chloride  were  administered,  the  same 
amount  on  the  third  day,  and  during  the  fourth  day  it  was  given 
every  two  hours.  Altogether  the  child  took  160  gr.  in  three  days. 
The  hemorrhage  began  to  lessen  twenty-four  hours  after  its  exhibi- 
tion, and  ceased  completely  in  forty-eight  hours,  the  child  recover- 
ing. To  be  of  any  use,  the  drug  must  be  given  freely,  and  it  is  clear 
that  in  this  case  it  had  no  harmful  effects. 

In  cases  of  severe  hemorrhage  the  tendency  to  fainting  should  be 

1  Year  Book  of  Treatment,  1899. 


GASTRIC  ULCER.  189 

counteracted  by  the  subcutaneous  injection  of  ether,  given  re- 
peatedly in  small  doses,  or  by  the  rectal  injection  of  stimulants,  by 
the  use  of  ammonium  carbonate,  or  the  cautious  employment  of 
ammonia  for  inhalations.  The  tendency  to  collapse  may  sometimes 
necessitate  transfusion,  which  may  be  performed  either  with  defibrin- 
ated  blood,  or  with  a  saline  solution,  which  may  be  injected  into  the 
connective  tissues.  A  3  per  cent,  solution  of  common  salt  may  thus 
be  used,  and  comparatively  large  amounts  of  fluid  may  be  absorbed 
from  the  connective  tissues,  and  thus  serve  to  replace  the  fluid  lost 
by  the  hsematemesis. 

Although  when  recent  hemorrhage  has  occurred  it  is  advisable  to 
employ  morphine  subcutaneously,  yet  as  in  almost  every  case  where 
the  existence  of  gastric  ulcer  is  suspected  opium  has  to  be  admin- 
istered, on  account  of  pain  or  of  frequent  vomiting,  it  is  preferable 
in  cases  without  hemorrhage  to  give  the  drug  by  the  mouth.  It  is 
desirable  to  check  the  administration  of  opium  as  pain  diminishes, 
since  gastric  ulcer  occurs  so  commonly  in  women  of  somewhat  neu- 
rotic tendencies,  and  there  is  considerable  danger  of  establishing  the 
opium  habit.  If  prescriptions  are  given  to  the  patient,  the  presence 
of  opium  should,  as  far  as  possible,  be  concealed  by  the  employment 
of  preparations  in  which  it  is  administered  under  some  other  name, 
such  as,  for  example,  the  compound  tincture  of  camphor,  or  the  com- 
pound soap  pill,  or  one  of  the  synonyms,  such  as  paregoric,  or  Scotch 
paregoric,  should  be  employed.  The  pill  of  lead  acetate  (3  grains) 
with  opium  (1  grain)  is  often  beneficial  in  cases  of  slight  hsemate- 
mesis, and  has  sometimes  been  termed  the  compound  lead  pill, 
although  this  synonym  is  not  recognized  in  the  Pharmacopoeia. 

Sometimes  it  is  found  that  opium  appears  to  increase  general  dis- 
comfort, although  it  allays  local  pain  ;  it  may  cause  headache  and 
loss  of  appetite,  and  it  frequently  gives  rise  to  nausea  and  constipa- 
tion. Any  of  these  symptoms  will  form  an  indication  either  for 
reducing  the  dose  or  for  checking  the  administration.  Should  it  be 
found  necessary  to  discontinue  the  use  of  opium,  some  other  local 
anaesthetic  will,  in  all  probability,  be  called  for.  Gastric  pain  is 
sometimes  relieved  by  the  use  of  cocaine  hydrochlorate  ;  from  1  to 
\  grain  may  be  given  in  solution  with  diluted  hydrocyanic  acid,  or 
with  cherry-laurel  water,  or  the  solution  of  cocaine  ordinarily  given 
by  hypodermatic  injection  may  be  administered  by  the  mouth  in 
doses  of  from  2  to  5  minims,  and  upward.  The  results  of  the  use 
of  cocaine  should  be  carefully  watched,  since,  occasionally,  even 


190  DIGESTION. 

these  small  doses  may  be  followed  by  symptoms  of  marked  collapse. 
This  drug  shares  with  opium  the  inconvenience  of  favoring  the 
formation  of  a  drug  habit,  and  although  it  is  a  very  satisfactory 
local  anaesthetic,  it  should  be  discontinued  when  the  urgency  of  the 
symptoms  has  subsided.  Silver  nitrate  is  sometimes  employed  in 
cases  of  gastric  ulcer,  either  to  diminish  pain  or  to  reduce  the  fre- 
quency of  vomiting.  It  may  be  given  for  a  short  time  as  a  pill  in 
doses  of  J  to  |-  grain,  but  there  is  some  risk  of  silver  being  deposited 
in  the  subcutaneous  tissues,  and  causing  troublesome  and  perhaps 
permanent  discoloration  of  the  skin. 

Recently  great  attention  has  been  paid  to  the  prospects  offered 
by  surgery  in  the  treatment  of  gastric  ulcer.  Some  have  advocated 
operative  measures  in  cases  where  perforation  has  not  occurred,  but 
the  grounds  suggested  scarcely  seem  to  be  adequate,  while  the  pros- 
pects of  affording  relief  are  rather  doubtful.  Early  operation  has 
been  recommended  as  a  precautionary  measure  to  save  life  in  the 
class  of  cases  which  experience  has  shown  to  be  generally  fatal ;  and 
it  has  also  been  advocated  as  a  quicker  means  of  cure  than  the 
ordinary  treatment  by  rest  and  dieting.  The  chief  indication  for 
operation  is,  according  to  Leube,'^  small  but  frequently  repeated 
hemorrhage  from  the  stomach,  but  he  thinks  gastro-enterostomy 
should  be  performed  when  intense  pain  and  urgent  vomiting  point 
to  spasmodic  closure  of  the  pylorus.  Operation  has,  however,  been 
recommended  for  increasing  emaciation  when  medical  treatment  has 
given  little  or  no  result,  and  the  power  of  work  and  enjoyment  of 
life  are  seriously  impaired  by  continued  pain,  vomiting,  and  dys- 
pepsia. The  great  difficulty  in  the  surgical  treatment  of  cases  of 
hemorrhage  lies  in  the  general  uncertainty  of  the  position  of  the 
ulcer,  while  it  is  well  known  that  perforation  occurs  most  commonly 
when  the  previous  symptoms  of  gastric  ulcer  have  been  very  slightly 
marked.  Hence  the  cases  for  surgical  treatment  previous  to  per- 
foration are  limited  almost  exclusively  to  those  in  which  the  vomit- 
ing, pain,  and  progressive  emaciation  indicate  the  existence  of 
pyloric  constriction  either  from  spasm  or  from  inflammatory  thicken- 
ing of  the  tissues  in  the  pyloric  region. 

The  sudden  collapse  which  results  from  the  perforation  of  a  gas- 
tric ulcer  calls  for  immediate  treatment  to  prevent  any  further  effu- 
sion of  the  gastric  contents  in  the  peritoneal  cavity,  and  also  to  allay 

1  Centralbl.  f.  Chirurg.,  No.  28,  1897. 


CANCER  OF  THE  STOMACH.  191 

pain,  which  is  commonly  severe.  The  patient  must  necessarily  be 
kept  perfectly  at  rest,  and  fairly  large  doses  of  morphine  should  be 
given  subcLitaneously,  or  an  opium  suppository  should  be  employed. 
Since  it  is  absolutely  essential  to  check  further  administration  of 
food  by  the  mouth,  the  feeding  must  be  effected  by  means  of  nutri- 
ent enemata,  as  in  the  treatment  of  cases  of  profuse  hsematemesis. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  best  chances  of  recovery  are  offered 
by  early  operation,  and  the  chances  of  success,  to  a  great  extent, 
depend  upon  the  rapidity  with  which  this  is  performed.  In  the 
successful  cases  which  have  been  recorded  the  operation  has  gener- 
ally been  undertaken  within  from  four  to  eight  hours  of  the  first 
symptoms  of  perforation,  but  recovery  has  occurred  when  the  oper- 
ation was  commenced  after  twenty-four  hours  and  even  after  sixty 
hours.  As  a  rule,  however,  it  is  comparatively  useless  to  operate 
after  symptoms  of  general  peritonitis  have  developed,  and  if,  from 
any  cause,  surgical  measures  have  been  deferred  until  such  symp- 
toms have  arisen,  it  may  be  better  to  trust  entirely  to  the  continuous 
use  of  opium  and  to  the  employment  of  fomentations,  or  of  light 
poultices,  over  the  abdomen.  Operations  for  the  relief  of  gastric 
ulcer  are  necessarily  hazardous,  since  the  ulcer  is  often  situated  at 
some  part  of  the  stomach  which  is  difficult  of  access.  Happily, 
however,  the  frequency  of  perforation  is  reduced  by  inflammatory 
processes  over  the  site  of  the  ulcer,  which  lead  to  adhesions  with 
adjacent  structures. 

Cancer  of  the  Stomach.  The  symptoms  of  cancer  of  the  stomach 
to  a  large  extent  depend  upon  the  site  affected.  When  cancer  in- 
volves one  of  the  orifices  of  the  stomach  it  will  necessarily  cause 
obstruction  to  the  onward  passage  of  food.  Cancer  of  the  cardiac 
orifice  is,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  practically  similar  to  cancer  of 
the  lower  end  of  the  oesophagus,  and  the  symptoms  and  treatment 
will  therefore  be  the  same.  When  cancer  attacks  the  pyloric  orifice, 
which  is  the  commonest  site,  it  causes  obstruction,  retention,  and 
frequently  subsequent  symptoms  of  dyspepsia,  flatulence,  and  vomit- 
ing. Cancer  at  other  parts  of  the  stomach  may  exist  for  a  length  of 
tune  without  causing  obstruction,  but  in  general,  after  a  prolonged 
period  of  dyspeptic  symptoms,  the  cancer  will  extend,  and  by  involv- 
ing the  pylorus  lead  to  more  persistent  vomiting. 

Another  symptom  of  frequent  occurrence  is  hsematemesis,  which 
may  result  either  from  passive  engorgement  of  the  vessels,  or  from 
ulcerative  changes  on  the  surface  of  the  cancer.  When  hsematemesis 


192  DIGESTION. 

has  occurred  there  will  probably  be  the  appearance  of  blood  in  the 
motions,  though  it  must  be  remembered  that  blood  is  also  some- 
times seen  independently  of  hsematemesis.  Very  frequently  there 
is  complaint  of  constipation,  but  this  symptom  may  not  be  present 
unless  there  is  some  degree  of  pyloric  obstruction.  Gradually  in- 
creasing distention  of  the  stomach  may  also  result  from  the  same 
pathological  condition.  Throughout  the  course  of  malignant  disease 
of  the  stomach,  the  patient  is  very  rarely  free  from  pain,  which  may 
probably  increase  in  intensity  after  food  has  been  taken.  As  in 
other  malignant  diseases  there  will  be  marked  cachexia  ;  the  wasting 
and  ansemia  are,  however,  much  greater  than  in  chronic  gastritis. 

Reference  has  already  been  made  to  the  usual  occurrence  of  this 
disease  in  later  middle  life,  a  feature  which  frequently  helps  in  diag- 
nosing malignant  ulceration  from  simple  ulceration,  although  it  does 
not  help  to  distinguish  a  case  of  chronic  gastritis,  which  may  occur 
at  almost  any  age.  The  detection  of  a  tumor  will  materially  aid  the 
diagnosis,  though  it  must  be  remembered  that  in  simple  ulceration 
of  the  stomach  there  may  be  much  inflammatory  thickening,  suffi- 
cient in  fact  to  cause  a  tumor,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  with  any 
of  these  conditions  there  is  commonly  much  rigidity  of  the  ab- 
dominal wall,  which  tends  to  obscure  any  alterations  in  the  stomach, 
unless  the  patient  is  put  under  an  ansesthetic. 

Short  of  surgical  interference,  the  treatment  of  cancer  of  the 
stomach  must  be  almost  entirely  symptomatic.  The  first  consid- 
eration is  to  regulate  the  diet,  so  as  to  -afford  the  maximum  of  nutri- 
tive value  Avith  the  minimum  of  work  and  also  of  waste.  When 
there  are  indications  of  obstruction,  the  diet  must  be  almost  entirely 
liquid,  and  should  usually  be  relatively  rich  in  nitrogenous  mate- 
rials and  poor  in  carbohydrates.  Nitrogenous  materials  can  fre- 
quently be  rendered  soluble  within  the  stomach  long  after  the  pres- 
ence of  a  gastric  tumor  has  been  established.  On  the  other  hand, 
when  access  to  the  intestine  is  difficult,  carbohydrates,  which  are 
mainly  digested  within  the  intestine,  will  be  liable  to  undergo  fer- 
mentative changes  within  the  stomach,  and  thus  increase  the  com- 
plaints of  dyspepsia.  Indeed,  in  many  cases  of  cancer  of  the  pylorus, 
the  frequency  of  vomiting  is,  to  a  great  extent,  dependent  upon  the 
frequency  of  administration  of  carbohydrates,  the  consequent  fer- 
mentative changes  promoting  flatulence,  distention,  irritation  of  the 
wall  of  the  stomach,  nausea,  and  vomiting.  Even  with  pyloric  ob- 
struction, the  power  of  digesting  solid  animal  food  may  be  retained 


CANCER  OF  THE  STOMACH.  193 

for  a  length  of  time,  provided  that  the  meat  is  carefully  cooked  and 
finely  divided,  either  by  mastication  or  by  previous  mincing.  With 
pyloric  obstruction  also,  although  the  food  may  with  advantage  be 
given  in  the  fluid  form,  everything  that  is  taken  should  be  as  con- 
centrated as  possible,  since  otherwise  the  fluid  may  accumulate 
within  the  stomach  and  thus  lead  to  considerable  dilatation.  In 
repeated  small  quantities,  milk  will  often  be  tolerated  for  a  length 
of  time. 

As  the  digestive  powers  fail,  it  may  be  necessary  to  resort  to  pep- 
tonizing the  food  before  administration,  for  every  effort  should  be 
made  to  prolong  the  period  during  which  food  is  given  by  the 
mouth.  Many  cases  of  cancer  of  the  stomach  even  when  first  seen 
are  so  extensive  that  operative  measures  are  almost  impossible,  and 
although  failing  digestive  powers  may  be  supplemented  by  the  ad- 
ministration of  nutrient  enemata,  the  time  during  which  the  latter 
can  be  serviceable  is  extremely  limited.  It  is  often  necessary  to 
cease  feeding  by  the  mouth  on  account  of  severe  attacks  of  hsemate- 
mesis,  which,  although  they  may  occur  quite  independently  of  any 
pyloric  obstruction,  are  as  a  rule  more  to  be  feared  when  pyloric 
obstruction  is  associated  with  frequent  vomiting.  The  food  sub- 
stances administered  by  the  rectum  do  not  differ  from  those  pre- 
viously described  (see  p.  152),  that  is  to  say,  peptonized  milk, 
peptonized  meat  jelly,  or  beef  peptones,  which  may  be  given  in 
doses  of  from  3  to  4  ounces  at  a  time.  When  owing  to  hemorrhage 
nutrient  enemata  have  to  be  employed,  the  hemorrhage  may,  to 
some  extent,  be  controlled,  and  the  sense  of  thirst  be  relieved  by 
allowing  the  patient  to  suck  ice  continuously.  The  loss  of  liquid 
may  also  to  some  extent  be  made  good  by  the  injection  of  tepid 
water  into  the  upper  part  of  the  rectum  or  into  the  sigmoid  flexure. 
Thus  a  pint  of  tepid  water  may  be  introduced  with  a  long  flexible 
tube,  but  the  introduction  must  be  effected  very  slowly,  and  the 
tube  must  be  pushed  high  into  the  rectum,  since  otherwise  the  liquid 
will,  in  all  probability,  be  expelled  instead  of  being  absorbed. 

With  regard  to  the  further  medical  treatment  required  in  cases 
of  cancer  of  the  stomach,  the  most  prominent  symptoms  will  afford 
guidance  in  the  individual  case.  If  there  is  evidence  of  pyloric  ob- 
struction and  of  dilatation  of  the  stomach,  it  is  desirable  to  empty 
the  stomach  daily  and  to  employ  lavage,  as  previously  described 
(see  Chronic  Gastritis,  p.  172).  The  removal  of  the  contents  of  the 
stomach  Avill  often  allay  a  good  deal  of  the  burning  pain,  but,  as  in 

13 


194  DIGESTION. 

cases  of  simple  gastric  ulcer,  it  is  necessary  to  be  extremely  cautious 
in  introducing  the  tube,  or  even  in  employing  lavage  when  there  is 
any  tendency  to  hemorrhage,  more  particularly  if  there  has  been 
recent  or  frequent  hemorrhage.  The  performance  of  lavage  will, 
however,  often  tend  to  diminish  the  risks  of  hemorrhage  when  the 
stomach  is  greatly  overloaded  with  food  and  its  walls  are  much 
dilated.  When  employing  lavage,  it  will  often  be  beneficial  to  wash 
out  the  stomach  with  sodium  chloride  or  with  an  alkaline  solution 
of  sodium  carbonate,  since  in  these  cases  there  is  commonly  an  over- 
secretion  of  mucus,  owing  to  the  irritation  produced  by  the  presence 
of  undigested  or  of  decomposing  food. 

Cancer  of  the  stomach  is  generally,  although  not  invariably, 
associated  with  pain,  and  this  symptom  calls  for  relief,  since,  if 
allowed  to  remain  unchecked,  it  tends  to  undermine  the  patient's 
strength.  Moreover,  even  when  cancer  is  present  the  pain  felt  in 
the  stomach  may  sometimes  be  due  to  causes  which  can  be  cared ; 
hence  it  becomes  extremely  important  to  form  an  accurate  opinion 
as  to  the  cause  and  nature  of  the  pain.  In  some  cases  a  tumor  may 
have  attained  great  size  before  there  has  been  any  complaint  of  pain, 
or  at  least  sufficient  conplaint  to  indicate  the  severe  nature  of  the 
disease.  When  cancer  affects  the  lesser  curvature  and  is  not  asso- 
ciated with  any  ulcerative  process,  there  may  be  no  pain  so  long  as  the 
pylorus  is  not  involved  and  so  long  as  the  ordinary  movements  of 
the  stomach  are  not  materially  affected.  On  the  other  hand,  pain 
will  frequently  depend  upon  interference  with  the  gastric  functions, 
that  is,  from  imperfect  digestion  leading  to  the  decomposition  or 
fermentation  of  food.  When  due  to  these  causes  the  pain  is  likely 
to  be  intermittent  and  to  occur  some  hours  after  food  has  been  taken. 
With  pyloric  obstruction,  pain  is  more  constant  in  character,  although 
it  will  be  intensified  during  digestion.  When,  however,  there  is 
ulceration,  the  pain  is  likely  to  be  more  severe,  even  though  it 
undergoes  great  exacerbations  when  food  has  been  introduced  into 
the  stomach. 

It  will  be  obvious  that  in  some  of  these  forms  of  pain  the  only 
treatment  likely  to  be  of  service  is  one  which  deadens  the  general 
sensibility.  Hence,  when  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  pain  is 
due  to  organic  causes,  such  as  ulceration,  or  pyloric  obstruction,  it 
will  be  necessary  to  employ  morphine  or  opium  frequently  ;  while, 
on  the  other  hand,  if  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  pain  is  due 
to  fermentative  changes,  measures  must  be  adopted  to  check  fermen- 


CANCER  OF  THE  STOMACH.  195 

tation  and  to  allay  the  abnormal  irritation  which  it  may  have 
excited. 

To  deal  with  the  latter  case,  since  it  presents  the  more  hopeful 
field  for  treatment ;  apart  from  the  modifications  of  diet  previously 
indicated,  it  will  be  necessary  to  administer  remedies  capable  of  con- 
trolling fermentative  processes.  Much  has  been  written  for  and 
against  the  employment  of  charcoal  under  such  conditions.  It  has 
been  urged  that  wood  charcoal  is  beneficial  on  account  of  its  remark- 
able power  of  absorbing  gases,  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  many 
patients  have  derived  considerable  relief  from  its  use.  On  the  other 
hand,  it  has  frequently  been  asserted  that  charcoal  only  possesses 
the  power  of  absorbing  gases  when  it  is  dry,  and  that  therefore  its 
internal  administration  is  based  upon  an  erroneous  hypothesis,  and, 
further,  it  has  been  held  that  the  benefits  which  have  been  ascribed 
to  its  employment  are  due  to  the  mechanical  removal  of  mucus  or 
else  to  stimulation  of  the  circulation  and  of  peristaltic  movements. 

Dr.  R,  B.  Wild^  has  recorded  the  results  of  numerous  experiments 
undertaken  to  determine  whether  cliarcoal  is  an  efficient  deodorizer 
and  oxidizer  of  organic  substances  when  used  in  the  wet  state,  and 
his  experiments  show  very  conclusively  that  wet  charcoal  hastens 
decomposition  by  oxidation.  He  attributes  its  benefits  therefore 
not  to  its  antiseptic  properties,  but  to  the  oxidation  of  chemical  sub- 
stances which  are  formed  during  abnormal  decomposition,  and  he 
suggests  that  this  oxidation  may  even  affect  the  various  toxins  pro- 
duced by  pathogenic  organisms. 

Wood  charcoal  may  be  prescribed  in  doses  of  from  60  to  120> 
grains  in  a  fine  powder,  but  as  this  powder  is  somewhat  repulsive- 
in  appearance,  various  preparations  have  been  made  for  the  intro- 
duction of  wood  charcoal  in  some  more  convenient  form.  Thus 
charcoal  may  be  administered  in  cachets,  or  in  wafer  papers,  or  it 
may  be  given  as  biscuits,  which,  although  unsightly,  can  usually  be 
taken  with  ease  and  comfort.  In  smaller  doses  of  from  10  to  20 
grains,  charcoal  may  be  given  with  equal  parts  of  magnesium  car- 
bonate and  bismuth  subnitrate,  and  this  mixture  certainly  relieves, 
pain  due  to  acidity  and  to  the  presence  of  large  quantities  of  gas. 

The  antiseptic  action  of  bismuth  salicylate  is  less  open  to  doubt. 
It  may  be  administered  in  suspension  with  mucilage,  or  in  wafer 
paper,  or  in  cachets  containing  from  5  to  10  grains  of  the  bismuth 

^  Medical  Chronicle,  March,  1896. 


196  DIGESTION. 

compound,  together  with  either  ammonium  carbonate,  sodium  car- 
bonate, or  magnesia.  I  have  often  found  benefit  result  from  the 
use  of  cachets  containing  5  grains  of  bismuth  salicylate,  with  2 
grains  of  ammonium  carbonate,  and  although  larger  doses  of  the 
salicylate  are  more  efficacious,  this  compound  is  so  very  light  that  it 
is  better  to  administer  two  such  cachets  rather  than  to  attempt  to 
get  a  larger  dose  into  a  single  cachet.  This  remedy  may  be  used 
either  immediately  before  food  or  some  two  hours  after  food,  when 
fermentative  changes  are  proceeding.  The  above  compound  has  the 
disadvantage  of  favoring  constipation,  and  it  may  therefore  occa- 
sionally be  necessary  to  check  its  administration  and  to  resort  to  the 
use  of  creosote  or  carbolic  acid. 

Beechwood  creosote  may  be  given  in  doses  of  1  minim,  or  upward, 
in  capsules,  which  may  be  taken  shortly  after  food,  while  carbolic 
acid  may  be  used  as  a  pill.  It  has  been  asserted  that  creosote  pos- 
sesses the  power  of  retarding  the  growth  of  cancer  in  certain  cases 
of  scirrhus  of  the  pylorus.  This  assertion  appears  to  be  somewhat 
open  to  doubt,  but  there  can  be  no  question  about  the  improvement 
which  often  follows  the  use  of  this  remedy,  more  particularly  witli 
regard  to  the  diminution  of  pain  and  of  distention.  It  will  often 
be  found,  however,  that  during  the  employment  of  creosote,  notwith- 
standing the  relief  of  pain,  there  may  be  loss  of  appetite  owing  to 
the  persistent  odor  of  the  drug,  and  occasionally,  during  its  adminis- 
tration, vomiting  appears  to  be  more  frequent  than  before.  This 
is  especially  likely  to  occur  if  the  remedy  is  used  too  freely,  or  in 
too  large  a  dose  before  toleration  has  been  established  with  smaller 
doses. 

When  the  pain  is  of  a  dull,  persistent  character,  before  resorting 
to  opium,  or  to  morphine,  it  is  advisable  to  administer  diluted  hydro- 
cyanic acid,  which  frequently  gives  great  relief  if  the  discomfort  is 
largely  due  to  gastritis.  The  diluted  hydrocyanic  acid  may  be 
given  in  combination  with  alkaline  carbonates,  such  as  sodium  bicar- 
bonate and  magnesium  carbonate.  The  benefit  which  follows  the 
use  of  these  drugs  is  sometimes  very  striking,  and  in  their  favor  it 
must  be  remembered  that  they  are  largely  curative,  instead  of  being 
merely  anodyne.  The  administration  of  opium  should  be  deferred 
until  some  or  all  of  the  foregoing  have  been  essayed,  since  although 
opium  gives  relief,  the  relief  is  purely  of  a  temporary  character,  and 
will  be  followed  in  all  probability  by  some  of  the  discomforts  insep- 
arable from  the  frequent  use  of  this  drug.     Thus  it  will  increase 


CANCER  OF  THE  STOMACH.  197 

constipation,  diminish  appetite,  and  to  some  extent  impair  the  diges- 
tive functions.  At  the  commencement  it  should  be  used  only  at 
night,  so  as  to  enable  the  patient  to  obtain  sleep,  and  it  may  then 
be  given  in  doses  of  |-  grain  with  5  grains  of  sodium  carbonate  and 
5  to  10  grains  of  bismuth  subcarbonate  j  or  morphine  tartrate  may 
be  given,  \  grain  to  J  grain  with  atropine  sulphate  -^^-^  grain  to 
T70"  gr^'iii  administered  hypodermatically,  commencing  of  course 
with  the  smaller  doses  and  only  increasing  the  amount  when  it  is 
found  that  the  smaller  doses  have  lost  their  effect.  Should  there  be 
any  objection  to  the  hypodermatic  injection  of  morphine,  some  form 
of  opium  may  be  given,  such  as  the  tincture,  the  camphorated  tinc- 
ture of  opium,  or  the  tincture  of  deordorized  opium,  any  of  which 
may  be  employed  whenever  the  pain  is  very  severe ;  one  of  the 
solutions  of  morphine  may  be  similarly  given  in  combination  with 
other  drugs.  As  the  disease  progresses,  it  will  always  be  found 
necessary  to  increase  the  amount  of  these  remedies,  and  also  to 
increase  the  frequency  of  their  administration. 

For  the  relief  of  vomiting  some  of  the  foregoing  remedies  may 
suffice,  since  vomiting  and  pain  frequently  go  hand-in-hand.  In 
addition,  the  employment  of  cold  is  often  very  serviceable,  whether 
applied  locally,  by  means  of  cold  compresses  or  ice  bags  over  the 
epigastrium,  or  internally  by  giving  iced  water  or  iced  milk,  or  by 
encouraging  the  patient  to  suck  ice  frequently.  The  need  of  arrest- 
ing feeding  by  the  mouth  whenever  hemorrhage  occurs  has  already 
been  indicated,  and  the  treatment  of  hemorrhage  in  cases  of  cancer 
in  no  way  differs  from  the  treatment  of  a  similar  condition  in  con- 
nection with  simple  ulcer. 

For  the  relief  of  constipation,  glycerin  suppositories  or  an  enema 
of  glycerin,  or  simple  enemata  should  be  employed.  This  symptom, 
however,  so  often  results  from  pyloric  obstruction  that  there  is  little 
object  in  endeavoring  to  obtain  a  daily  action  of  the  bowels,  since 
in  these  cases  very  little  food  reaches  the  intestine,  and  the  reflex 
excitability  of  the  intestine  is  therefore  greatly  diminished.  Should 
there  be  much  discomfort,  however,  associated  with  flatulence  in  the 
intestine,  resulting  apparently  from  the  constipation,  relief  may  be 
afforded  by  the  occasional  use  of  mild  purgatives.  Small  doses  of 
rhubarb  may  be  given  after  meals,  or  the  extract  of  aloes  may  be 
employed  in  pill  form  at  night,  while  further  relief  may  sometimes 
be  afforded  by  the  addition  of  a  grain  of  calomel.  Sooner  or  later 
surgical  measures  must  be  discussed  ;  in  nearly  every  case  the  chief 


198  DIGESTION. 

indications  for  operation  will  depend  upon  the  site  of  the  tumor. 
As  a  rule,  in  cases  of  pyloric  obstruction,  gastro-enterostomy  is  pre- 
ferred. It  is  only,  however,  in  very  rare  cases  that  it  is  possible 
or  advisable  to  remove  the  affected  portion  of  the  stomach.  Though 
the  operation  of  pylorectomy,  or  resection  of  the  pylorus,  has  been 
recommended,  this  operation  is  attended  with  a  very  high  mortality, 
and  it  is  somewhat  difficult  to  perform.  Far  more  frequently  it  is 
felt  that  it  is  safer  not  to  interfere  with  the  tumor,  but  to  establish 
a  fistulous  opening  between  the  stomach  and  the  small  intestine. 
This  frequently  affords  relief,  and  it  may  also  postpone  the  natural 
termination  of  the  disease.  For  the  modes  of  performing  this  and 
other  operations  in  cases  of  cancer  of  the  stomach  the  reader  is 
referred  to  text-books  on  surgery. 

Gastric  Neuroses:  Gastralgia,  or  Gastrodynia.  There  are 
various  neuroses  of  the  stomach  associated  with  considerable  pain, 
frequently,  although  not  always,  of  neuralgic  type ;  that  is  to  say, 
the  pain  and  the  other  symptoms  of  this  class  of  cases  very  com- 
monly appear  to  depend  purely  upon  some  alteration  in  the  nervous 
system  without  any  necessary  local  lesions.  These  cases  are  very 
difficult  to  differentiate  from  those  dependent  on  anatomical  lesions  ; 
thus,  for  example,  the  cases  in  which  pain  is  the  more  prominent 
symptom  strongly  resemble  many  of  those  of  simple  or  of  malignant 
ulcer.  These  cases  have  been  conveniently  grouped  under  the  name 
of  gastralgia,  or  gastrodynia.  They  occur  mainly  in  connection  with 
anaemia,  with  chlorosis,  and  with  hysteria,  although  in  some  instances 
the  pain  has  its  origin  in  alterations  of  the  blood,  due,  for  example, 
to  malaria,  gout,  or  rheumatism.  The  pain  appears,  also,  especially 
among  hysterical  females,  with  irritation  of  some  portion  of  the 
genito-urinary  tract ;  it  may  occur  only  at  the  menstrual  periods,  or 
it  may  be  most  marked  at  these  times. 

The  chief  feature  by  which  gastralgia,  or  gastrodynia,  differs  from 
the  clinical  picture  of  ulceration,  is  the  sudden  onset  of  the  pain, 
together  with  the  sudden  relief  which  may  occur  after  a  short 
interval.  This  relief  is  sometimes  associated  with  eructation  of  gas, 
or  of  watery  fluid,  or  it  may  be  attended  with  vomiting,  or  with  free 
perspiration  ;  sometimes,  however,  especially  in  neurotic  patients, 
it  ceases  with  the  passage  of  a  quantity  of  pale  urine.  These  attacks 
of  pain  are  very  indefinite  as  to  the  time  of  their  occurrence,  which 
is  not  the  case  when  the  pain  is  due  to  organic  causes.  The  inter- 
vals separating  the  attacks  may  be  of  considerable  duration,  although 


GASTBALOIA,   OB  OASTBODYNIA.  199 

in  malarial  cases  they  are  likely  to  occur  periodically.  Neurotic 
pain  also  may  not  only  be  relieved  by  pressure,  but  it  is  often  better 
after  food  has  been  taken,  in  both  of  which  features  it  differs  very 
markedly  from  the  pain  of  gastric  ulcer.  It  will  be  found  too  that 
if  the  character  of  this  symptom  is  misunderstood,  and  the  patient 
is  treated  with  enforced  abstinence,  the  condition  usually  becomes 
worse  than  before,  especially  in  those  cases  which  appear  to  have 
their  origin  in  chlorosis. 

The  frequency  of  gastritis  in  connection  with  chlorosis  must  not, 
however,  be  overlooked,  and  it  will  often  be  necessary  to  assume 
the  existence  of  gastritis,  and  to  treat  this  condition  together  with 
the  chlorosis  before  the  neurotic  character  has  been  determined. 
Gastralgia  may  also  be  excited  by  some  special  article  of  diet,  and 
the  discovery  of  this  exciting  cause  will  naturally  suggest  the  elimi- 
nation of  the  irritant  substance.  The  special  irritant  may  some- 
times be  found  among  articles  of  diet  which  are  commonly  regarded 
as  soothing  rather  than  irritating  ;  thus,  in  some  instances,  milk 
may  be  found  to  act  as  an  exciting  cause,  while  shell  fish  seem  to 
be  frequently  more  harmful  than  fish  of  the  more  ordinary  kinds. 
Occasionally  eggs  will  be  found  to  disagree,  and  the  pain  will  some- 
times ensue  in  spite  of  alterations  in  the  mode  of  their  adminis- 
tration. 

Special  idiosyncrasies  will  also  affect  the  use  of  some  forms  of 
fruit,  whether  cooked  or  raw,  as  well  as  some  kinds  of  vegetables. 
Careful  inquiry,  therefore,  will  be  needed  to  establish  the  exciting 
cause,  and  even  when  this  cannot  be  determined,  it  is  always  well 
to  modify  the  diet  so  as  to  supply  only  light,  nourishing  materials, 
which  are  easily  digested.  Meanwhile,  it  is  advisable  to  note  any 
associated  dyscrasia,  and  when  the  patient  is  suffering  from  chlorosis, 
or  anaemia,  these  conditions  should  be  treated  on  general  principles 
with  unirritating  forms  of  iron.  The  efficacy  of  the  pills  of  ferrous 
carbonate  will  often  be  found  to  be  greatly  increased  by  the  addition 
of  ferrous  arsenate,  but  occasionally  it  is  impossible  to  employ  this 
drug,  as  it  may  increase  pain,  and  may  even  produce  other  symp- 
toms of  gastritis.  It  will  often  be  necessary  to  change  the  form 
of  iron  administered,  as  well  as  to  increase  the  amount.  The  sac- 
charated  carbonate  is  sometimes  preferred  to  the  ferrous  carbonate 
pills,  and  it  may  be  given  in  doses  of  from  10  to  30  grains,  or  f  to  1 
fluidounce  of  the  compound  mixture  of  iron  may  be  substituted. 
Reduced  iron  is  also  often  of  great  service,  and  can  be  given  in 


200  DIGESTION. 

doses  of  from  1  to  5  grains,  either  mixed  with  sugar  or  with  some 
aromatic  powder. 

In  chlorotic  cases  the  immediate  relief  of  pain  may  have  to  be 
considered,  and  when  it  is  very  severe  the  temptation  to  employ 
opium  is  very  considerable  ;  indeed,  it  may  be  necessary  to  use  mor- 
phine hypodermatically  if  the  pain  is  continuous  and  the  patient's 
rest  is  being  disturbed.  In  general,  however,  it  is  well  to  defer  the 
use  of  opiates  as  long  as  possible,  since  chlorotic  patients  are  only 
too  likely  to  magnify  the  pain  for  the  sake  of  obtaining  the  remedy. 
It  is  better,  therefore,  to  use  some  simpler  form  of  sedative,  as,  for 
example,  cannabis  indica,  chloroform,  or  ether.  Cannabis  indica 
can  be  employed  as  a  pill,  made  with  the  extract,  or  the  tincture 
may  be  given  suspended  in  mucilage.  This  drug  must  be  given 
with  some  degree  of  caution,  since  different  specimens  of  the  extract 
vary  so  much  in  strength,  and  I  have  known  moderate  doses  of  the 
pharmacopoeial  tincture  to  be  followed  by  toxic  symptoms,  such  as 
giddiness  and  sense  of  alarm.  It  is  well,  therefore,  when  using 
cannabis  indica,  to  commence  with  small  doses  and  to  increase  the 
amount  by  degrees  while  using  the  same  preparation.  It  has  been 
found  that  doses  which  have  been  taken  for  a  length  of  time  without 
ill  effects  have  produced  alarming  symptoms  when  the  prescription 
has  been  taken  to  another  chemist. 

The  use  of  chloroform,  either  as  the  aqua  chloroformi  m  doses  of 
1  ounce,  or  the  spirit  of  chloroform  in  doses  of  5  minims  and  upward, 
is  sometimes  extremely  beneficial,  while  the  moral  effect  of  ether, 
largely  due  to  its  unpleasant  taste  and  odor,  will  sometimes  succeed 
where  other  remedies  have  failed.  Different  volatile  oils  have  been 
used  with  advantage,  such  as  oil  of  cajuput,  or  oil  of  peppermint, 
and  these  may  be  added  to  the  mixture  of  chloroform,  or  they  may 
be  given  with  diluted  hydrocyanic  acid.  Occasionally  it  is  found 
that  belladonna  may  give  relief,  5  to  15  minims  of  the  tincture 
being  given  with  chloroform  water,  or  with  diluted  hydrocyanic 
acid.  Whitla  speaks  strongly  in  favor  of  large  doses  of  sodium 
bicarbonate,  40  grains  with  |-  grain  of  morphine. 

When  the  pain  persists,  it  will  be  advisable  to  employ  local 
remedies  which  induce  counter-irritation,  such  as  poultices  or  fomen- 
tations, and'  the  action  of  the  fomentation  may  be  increased  by  the 
use  of  oil  of  cajuput,  oil  of  turpentine,  or  by  the  application  of  lini- 
ments of  aconite  or  of  belladonna.  In  some  purely  hysterical  forms 
of  pain  relief  may  be  afforded  by  the  hypodermatic  injection  of  water. 

DR,  L  G.  TAYLOR, 

Kansas  City,  Mo. 


GASTBALGIA,  OB  GASTBODYNIA.  201 

I  have  known  cases  of  gastralgia  to  improve  very  much  during  the 
employment  of  nux  vomica,  or  of  strychnine,  given  either  by  the 
mouth,  or  by  hypodermatic  injection,  though  this  last  method  of 
employment  is  required  comparatively  rarely  ;  strychnine  appears 
to  act  beneficial  mainly  on  account  of  its  power  of  increasing  the  ap- 
petite and  causing  increased  contractions  of  the  wall  of  the  stomach. 
In  some  forms  of  gastralgia,  charcoal  in  wafer  papers,  or  in  cachets, 
will  be  very  serviceable,  especially  where  the  gastralgia  is  associated 
with  much  flatulent  dyspepsia.  Other  remedies  which  have  been 
recommended  are  the  following  :  salts  of  silver,  as  the  oxide  or  the 
nitrate,  which  are  best  given  in  pill  form  ;  antispasmodics,  such  as 
the  compounds  of  zinc,  more  particularly  the  valerianate  ;  potassium 
iodide  ;  salol  and  resorcin.  The  last  has  been  much  commended, 
but  in  my  hands  it  has  not  given  very  satisfactory  results.  When 
gastralgia  appears  to  be  of  malarial  origin,  it  is  necessary  to  use 
quinine  or  arsenic.  The  former,  as  a  rule,  gives  better  relief,  and 
should  be  administered  in  comparatively  large  doses,  5  grains  and 
upward,  three  times  a  day.  If,  however,  it  fails,  arsenic  may  be 
employed,  but,  as  already  indicated,  the  effect  on  the  digestive 
powers  must  be  carefully  watched. 

The  dyspeptic  symptoms  associated  with  gastrodynia  may  be 
accompanied  by  a  secretion  of  normal  gastric  juice,  or  the  gastric 
juice  may  be  altered  in  various  ways.  The  amount  of  the  acid  may 
be  greatly  reduced,  more  particularly  in  cases  of  gastric  neuroses 
occurring  during  convalescence,  or,  on  the  other  hand,  there  may 
be  a  condition  of  hyperacidity,  where  it  is  probable  that  the  acid 
which  is  present  in  such  large  excess  is  of  a  morbid  character,  and 
is  not  merely  an  increase  in  the  normal  acid  of  the  gastric  juice. 
This  acid,  which  is  commonly  butyric  or  lactic,  results  from  altera- 
tions in  the  food,  and  in  all  probability  is  owing  to  the  presence  of 
bacteria.  The  occurrence  of  these  forms  of  dyspepsia  will  be 
marked  by  discomfort  after  food,  together  with  pyrosis,  and  with 
alterations  of  appetite.  The  appetite  may  sometimes  be  greatly 
increased,  so  that  there  is  a  craving  for  food,  which  is,  however, 
checked  after  the  first  few  mouthfuls  have  been  taken,  and  replaced 
then  by  a  sense  of  fulness.  More  commonly  the  appetite  is  greatly 
diminished,  and  the  sight  of  food  may  even  provoke  nausea. 

Even  when  there  is  not  much  alteration  in  the  character  of  the 
gastric  juice,  these  cases  may  still  give  rise  to  great  emaciation, 
which  is  so  often  seen  in  severe  cases  of  neurasthenia.     Occasionally 


202  DIGESTION. 

the  appetite  becomes  perverted,  so  that  there  is  craving  for  various 
indigestible  articles  which  may  induce  severe  forms  of  gastritis. 
In  these  morbid  states  of  the  nervous  system,  apart  from  the  regu- 
lation of  diet,  there  is  generally  extreme  difficulty  in  treating  the 
dyspepsia.  Change  of  air,  change  of  scene,  and  of  surroundings  will 
occasionally  prove  beneficial,  but  it  is  of  very  little  use  to  employ 
the  ordinary  gastric  sedatives,  or  antacids,  so  long  as  the  patient 
remains  in  the  normal  surroundings.  The  best  results  are  generally 
to  be  obtained  from  the  Weir  Mitchell  treatment,  but  to  be  of  any 
material  use  this  must  be  rigidly  enforced,  and  the  isolation  particu- 
larly must  be  insisted  upon.  Massage  and  electrical  treatment  are 
not  likely  to  be  of  much  service  unless  the  patient  is  removed  from 
the  normal  atmosphere  of  sympathy.  It  is  often  found  that  during 
the  Weir  Mitchell  treatment,  in  which  forced  feeding  takes  a  promi- 
nent place,  the  digestive  powers  are  speedily  restored,  and,  to  their 
own  surprise,  patients  are  enabled  to  take  enormous  quantities  of 
food,  not  only  without  discomfort,  but  even  with  some  degree  of 
enjoyment. 

This  treatment  will  also  frequently  prove  very  serviceable  in  cases 
of  nervous  vomiting.  If  the  vomiting  has  not  been  of  long  dura- 
tion, there  is  every  probability  that  it  will  speedily  be  arrested  by 
a  short  course  of  massage  and  electricity  ;  but  in  extreme  cases, 
when  associated  with  much  wasting,  the  ordinary  treatment  for 
neurasthenia  must  be  carried  out  in  its  entirety.  When  there  is 
diminution  in  the  acidity  of  the  gastric  juice,  it  is  frequently  neces- 
sary to  employ  pepsin  and  diluted  hydrochloric  acid,  as  in  ordinary 
forms  of  atonic  dyspepsia  ;  while,  when  there  is  much  increase  of 
acidity,  although  temporary  relief  may  be  given  by  the  administra- 
tion of  sodium  bicarbonate,  the  cure  may  be  rendered  more  perma- 
nent by  washing  out  the  stomach  with  alkaline  solutions,  and  by 
the  subsequent  employment  of  dilute  sulphurous  acid,  or  of  potash, 
creosote,  or  carbolic  acid,  remedies  which  will  check  the  fermentative 
changes  which  produce  the  free  acids  above  mentioned. 

In  these  cases  of  hyperacidity  it  is  always  desirable  to  diminish 
the  amount  of  saccharine  and  starchy  foods  and  to  increase  the 
amount  of  nitrogenous  food.  Frequently  benefit  is  obtained  by  the 
administration  of  comparatively  large  quantities  of  finely  minced  lean 
meat,  taking  care  to  remove  all  traces  of  fat  and  of  tendinous  mate- 
rial. The  nutrition  may  also  be  aided  by  the  employment  of  cream, 
or  eggs  and  cream  whipped  up  together,  and  although  some  patients 


GASTBALGIA,   OB  GASTBODYNIA.  203 

turn  against  this  diet,  it  is  really  surprising  how  much  cream  may 
sometimes  be  taken  without  any  increase  of  dyspeptic  symptoms,  and 
with  marked  improvement  of  nutrition. 

With  both  nervous  dyspepsia  and  nervous  vomiting,  constipation 
is  frequently  a  prominent  symptom,  and  calls  for  the  repeated 
administration  of  purgatives,  such  as  senna,  rhubarb,  or  occasionally 
small  doses  of  calomel.  AVhen  there  is  much  flatulence  in  addition 
to  constipation,  the  discomfort  may  be  relieved  by  the  employment 
of  carminatives,  such  as  the  volatile  oils,  of  which  peppermint  and 
turpentine  are  perhaps  the  best.  These  may  be  given  with  sodium 
bicarbonate,  or  with  tincture  of  cinchona,  the  latter  frequently 
assisting  materially  in  restoring  the  appetite. 


CHAPTER    IX. 

DIGESTION—  Continued. 

Intestinal  Colic,  or  Enteralgia — Lead  Colic — Constipation :  Exercise,  Diet, 
Laxatives — Tympanites. 

Intestinal  Colic,  or  Enteralgia.  Under  these  names  may  be 
included  all  those  cases  of  intestinal  pain  which  are  not  only  inde- 
pendent of  inflammation  of  any  portion  of  the  intestinal  wall,  or  of 
the  peritoneal  covering,  but  also  of  any  structural  alteration  in  the 
intestine.  The  condition  is  distinctly  comparable  with  gastralgia, 
and,  like  this  affection,  it  may  be  due  to  spasmodic  contraction  of 
the  muscular  tissue  ;  or  it  may  be  of  a  neuralgic  type,  affecting  the 
nerves  of  the  intestine.  In  the  former  case  the  pain  is  most  com- 
monly an  indication  of  reflex  spasm,  which  is  generally  due  to  irri- 
tation within  the  intestine.  The  neuralgic  cases  are  less  frequent, 
and  are  perhaps  to  be  traced  to  cold  or  to  some  diathesis  such  as 
rheumatism  or  gout.  Intestinal  colic  is  very  frequently  associated 
with  constipation,  although  constipation  is  not  invariably  the  imme- 
diate exciting  cause  of  the  colic. 

Among  the  reflex  causes  of  colic  which  require  recognition  may 
be  enumerated  the  following  :  direct  irritation  of  the  intestine,  which 
may  result  either  from  the  ingestion  of  some  article  of  food  Avhich 
can  only  be  digested  with  difficulty,  or  else  from  the  swallowing  of 
some  hard  substance  which  cannot  possibly  be  digested.  It  may 
also  ensue  from  the  irritation  produced  by  hard  masses  of  feces,  and 
by  gallstones.  Frequently  severe  colic  appears  in  children  in  con- 
nection with  irritation  from  intestinal  worms,  more  particularly  the 
round  worm.  Chronic  constipation  may  give  rise  to  this  symptom, 
partly  by  the  irritation  from  direct  pressure,  and  partly,  in  all  prob- 
ability, from  the  spasm  which  may  result  from  ineffectual  attempts 
to  drive  onward  the  contents  of  the  intestine. 

It  has  been  asserted  that  in  cases  of  intestinal  pain  some,  if  not 
all,  of  the  pain  may  be  due  to  over-distention  of  a  portion  of  the 
intestine  with  flatus  ;  but  it  appears  more  probable  that,  as  in  chronic 
constipation,  the  pain  is  due  to  spasmodic  contraction  of  the  muscu- 
lar coat  rather  than  to  over-distention.     The  spasmodic  contraction 


INTESTINAL  COLIC,  OB  ENTEBALOIA.  205 

of  involuntary  muscle  is  almost  invariably  associated  with  severe 
pain,  while  on  the  other  hand  the  intestine  may  frequently  be  much 
distended  throughout  the  greater  part  of  its  length  without  the 
occurrence  of  pain.  These  forms  of  irritation  can,  as  a  rule,  be  easily 
treated  when  the  cause  has  been  recognized.  In  almost  every  case 
it  is  advisable  to  adopt  some  measures  to  relax  muscular  contraction, 
and  the  treatment  will  depend,  to  some  extent,  upon  the  severity 
and  upon  the  persistence  of  the  pain.  When  very  severe,  it  may 
be  necessary  to  give  relief  by  the  administration  of  opium,  but  at 
the  same  time  any  source  of  irritation  within  the  intestine  must  be 
removed.  This  may  be  effected  most  conveniently  by  the  employ- 
ment of  enemata  of  warm  soap  and  water.  It  is  desirable  that  these 
should  be  fairly  bulky,  from  20  to  30  ounces  of  liquid  being  em- 
ployed. Sometimes  simple  soap  and  water  will  be  sufficient,  but 
frequently  it  is  found  better  to  use  an  enema  of  turpentine,  like  that 
included  in  the  British  Pharmacopoeia  of  1885,  which  consisted  of 
1  fluidounce  of  oil  of  turpentine  with  15  fluidounces  of  mucilage  of 
starch.  It  may  be  advisable  to  repeat  the  enema  within  an  hour 
if  the  first  has  given  no  relief. 

The  local  application  of  opium  over  the  surface  of  the  abdomen 
is  often  attended  with  good  results,  the  best  way  of  employing  it 
being  to  use  hot  fomentations,  or  poultices,  sprinkled  with  tinctura 
opii.  This  will  often  suffice  to  arrest  the  pain,  while  the  enema 
may  perhaps  have  removed  the  cause  of  the  pain.  Should  pain 
persist,  however,  it  will  be  necessary  to  use  some  mild  purgative, 
like  castor  oil,  or  one  or  other  of  the  natural  purgative  waters.  A 
little  calomel  as  a  powder  or  pill  will  sometimes  give  greater  relief, 
but  in  general  it  is  desirable  to  employ  the  simplest  and  mildest 
purgatives,  since  any  strong  aperient  will  be  only  too  likely  to 
increase  pain.  Occasionally  it  is  found  that  the  pain  is  so  severe 
as  to  demand  the  hypodermatic  administration  of  morphine  ;  but, 
if  possible,  it  is  desirable  to  avoid  both  morphine  and  opium,  since 
they  diminish  the  contractions  of  the  intestine,  promote  constipation, 
and  thus  increase  the  liability  to  intestinal  colic. 

The  milder  forms  of  colic  may  frequently  be  treated  more  satis- 
factorily by  the  employment  of  preparations  of  belladonna,  and  of 
nux  vomica,  together  with  various  carminatives.  When  intestinal 
colic  is  of  a  mild  nature  and  associated  with  severe  constipation,  a 
pill  containing  extract  of  nux  vomica,  extract  of  belladonna,  and  a 
little  capsicum  will  often  be  of  very  great  service.     This  pill  may 


206  DIGESTION. 

be  rendered  more  laxative  by  the  addition  of  extract  of  rhubarb  or 
of  compound  extract  of  colocynth.  The  latter,  however,  even  though 
it  ultimately  tends  to  give  great  relief,  is  very  likely  to  increase 
pain  for  a  short  time,  the  action  of  colocynth  being  commonly  asso- 
ciated with  much  more  colic  than  that  which  follows  the  use  of 
rhubarb. 

Mild  cases  of  intestinal  colic  associated  with  constipation  are  to 
be  treated  with  laxatives  and  with  general  hygienic  and  dietetic 
measures,  to  be  described  later  under  the  heading  of  Constipation. 

The  forms  of  colic  due  to  neuralgic  conditions,  such  as  those 
which  may  result  from  exposure  to  cold,  are  commonly  of  greater 
severity  than  those  already  described,  but,  like  them,  they  are  to 
be  treated  with  measures  calculated  to  relieve  spasm.  Warm  appli- 
cations over  the  abdomen,  together  with  hypodermatic  injections  of 
morphine,  will  in  general  afford  the  most  speedy  relief,  and  there 
need  be  no  hesitation  in  employing  these  measures  in  cases  that  are 
free  from  any  suspicion  of  the  existence  of  local  causes  of  irritation. 

The  great  difficulty  in  dealing  with  many  of  these  cases  of  intes- 
tinal colic  consists  in  the  differentiation  of  this  neuralgic  condition 
from  acute  inflammatory  affections,  more  particularly  of  the  mucous 
lining  of  the  intestine  or  of  its  peritoneal  covering.  The  symptoms 
of  intestinal  colic  are  sometimes  very  similar  to  those  of  appendi- 
citis. The  sudden  onset  of  severe  pain,  which  may  be  associated 
with  vomiting ;  the  hardness  and  rigidity  of  the  abdominal  Avail, 
especially  over  the  right  side,  form  features  which  are  frequently 
common  to  both  conditions.  In  colic,  however,  there  is  an  absence 
of  febrile  symptoms,  and  the  pain  is  rarely  so  continuous  as  in 
appendicitis.  It  may  diminish,  or  even  cease,  with  an  action  of  the 
bowels,  or  with  the  passage  of  flatus,  while  it  is  commonly  some- 
what relieved  by  pressure.  It  is  important  to  bear  in  mind  these 
points  of  difference,  since  in  appendicitis  the  modern  tendency  is  to 
avoid  the  use  of  opium  or  morphine,  remedies  which  may,  however, 
be  extremely  desirable  if  the  patient  is  only  suffering  from  enter- 
algia,  from  exposure  to  cold,  or  from  other  nerve  irritation. 

Colic  in  infants  is  frequently  the  result  of  unsuitable  food,  and  is 
very  often  associated  with  constipation.  It  may  occur  at  any  time 
during  the  early  months  of  life,  but  is  most  likely  to  arise  when  the 
infant  is  being  fed  artificially,  and  when  the  milk  is  not  properly 
digested.  In  the  first  stages  of  infant  life  this  will  often  result  from 
the  milk  being  given  in  too  concentrated  a  form ;  but  somewhat 


INTESTINAL  COLIC,   OB  ENTERALGIA.  207 

later  it  may  follow  the  too  early  employment  of  starchy  foods. 
Colic  in  infancy,  therefore,  iiiay  arise  even  among  children  who  have 
been  fed  at  the  breast  when  attempts  are  being  made  to  supplement 
with  artificial  food.  When  due  to  the  non-digestion  of  cow's  milk, 
it  is  very  frequently  associated  with  vomiting,  the  milk  being 
rejected  in  large  masses  of  curd  shortly  after  a  meal.  But  inde- 
pendently of  vomiting,  colic  may  arise,  the  abdomen  becoming  hard 
and  rigid,  while  the  child  may  writhe  in  pain.  During  the  pain 
there  is  frequently  much  pallor  at  the  commencement  of  the  attack, 
though  with  violent  screaming  this  may  be  replaced  by  redness  or 
even  by  a  cyanotic  condition. 

The  treatment  to  be  adopted  must  depend  upon  the  age  of  the 
infant.  It  is  obviously  improper  to  resort  to  the  use  of  preparations 
of  opium  at  this  early  age.  The  pain  may  be  relieved  by  the 
administration  of  a  little  dill  water,  and  the  relief  is  often  greater  if 
this  is  given  with  an  equal  quantity  of  warm  water.  It  is  extremely 
difficult,  in  infants,  to  determine  whether  the  colic  is  gastric  or  intes- 
tinal. Frequently  the  trouble  appears  to  be  gastric,  since  the  regur- 
gitation of  milk  or  the  eructation  of  flatus  will  be  succeeded  by  a 
look  of  relief  and  a  cessation  of  screaming.  In  infants,  when  colic 
results  from  indigestion  of  milk,  it  is  advisable  to  dilute  the  milk 
with  lime  water,  the  proportion  being  determined  by  the  age  of  the 
infant.  Equal  parts  of  good  milk  and  of  lime  water  may  be  given  ; 
occasionally  this  may  favor  constipation,  and  thus  necessitate  a 
reduction  in  the  quantity  of  lime  water,  but  the  milk  then  should 
still  be  diluted  with  water.  As  the  age  increases,  the  degree  of 
dilution  must  be  diminished,  so  that  by  the  third  or  fourth  month 
good  milk  only  requires  to  be  diluted  with  a  third  or  a  fourth  part 
of  water.  Colic,  may  be  excited  in  infants,  even  when  fed  at  the 
breast,  by  the  meals  being  administered  too  frequently  ;  but  in  all 
probability  this  colic  is  gastric  rather  than  intestinal,  and  can  easily 
be  overcome  by  greater  attention  to  regularity  and  by  giving  the 
meals  at  stated  hours.  These  forms  of  colic,  if  untreated,  may  very 
readily  pass  on  to  more  severe  conditions  of  gastro-enteritis,  marked 
by  severe  vomiting  and  purging,  with  rapid  wasting.  I  have  little 
doubt  that  most  of  the  cases  of  infantile  diarrhoea  have  commenced 
as  cases  of  simple  colic,  which  might  perhaps  have  been  arrested  if 
treated  at  the  commencement. 

The  medicinal  treatment  employed  in  infants  must  largely  depend 
upon  the  age  and    upon   the   prominent    symptom   or  symptoms. 


208  DIGESTION. 

When  the  condition  is  purely  one  of  colic,  without  any  vomiting  or 
diarrhoea,  the  pain  may  be  relieved  partly  by  the  alteration  in  the 
nature  of  the  food,  and  partly  by  the  administration  of  carminatives. 

The  compound  tincture  of  cardamoms  and  dill  water  are  extremely 
serviceable,  and  their  efficacy  may  be  greatly  increased  by  the  addi- 
tion of  small  quantities  of  sodium  bicarbonate.  Dill  water  has  been 
mentioned,  since  it  is  perhaps  the  carminative  most  commonly  used  ; 
but  almost  any  of  the  volatile  aromatic  oils  may  be  employed,  in 
suitable  doses,  for  the  relief  of  intestinal  colic.  Very  often  the 
action  of  these  may  be  increased  by  the  addition  of  some  form  of 
stimulant.  Small  amounts  of  the  aromatic  spirit  of  ammonia  may 
be  added  to  the  alkaline  and  aromatic  mixture  with  advantage,  the 
skin  becoming  warm  and  the  pulse  more  full  during  the  administra- 
tion of  this  remedy.  It  is,  however,  necessary  to  be  careful  in  its 
administration,  and  to  graduate  the  dose  with  due  regard  to  the  age 
of  the  infant,  since  I  have  known  children  momentarily  stop  breath- 
ing from  reflex  laryngeal  spasm  when  aromatic  spirit  of  ammonia 
has  been  employed  in  too  concentrated  a  form.  Some  practitioners 
prefer  brandy  in  place  of  aromatic  spirit  of  ammonia,  but  there  are 
many  arguments  to  be  adduced  against  this  practice  ;  thus,  samples  of 
brandy  obtained  from  various  sources  are  of  very  different  strengths, 
while  another  objection  lies  in  the  frequency  with  which  this  stimu- 
lant is  directed  to  be  mixed  with  milk  by  the  nurse,  instead  of  being 
mixed  with  the  medicine  by  the  chemist.  Although  I  have  seen 
very  great  improvement  from  the  use  of  brandy,  the  improvement 
has  been  mainly  in  the  relief  of  the  condition  of  collapse,  which  so 
often  ensues  if  the  colic  is  succeeded  by  diarrhoea  ;  but  even  in 
these  cases  I  prefer  employing  this  remedy  in  the  form  of  the  mis- 
tura  spiritus  vini  gallici  of  the  British  Pharmacopoeia,  instead  of 
directing  that  the  stimulant  should  be  given  in  the  crude  form. 
This  mixture  is  made  of  four  ounces  of  brandy,  four  ounces  of  cin- 
namon water,  half  an  ounce  of  sugar,  and  the  yolks  of  two  eggs. 

It  is  perhaps  well  to  remember  that,  although  compound  tincture 
of  cardamoms  and  ammonium  carbonate  are  of  use  in  these  cases, 
these  two  compounds  do  not  mix  very  well  together,  since  the  alkali 
destroys  the  clear  color  of  the  compound  tincture  of  cardamoms. 

When  colic  in  infants  is  associated  with  constipation  and  the 
passage  of  clay-like  motions,  benefit  is  often  derived  from  the  admin- 
istration of  castor  oil,  the  increased  action  of  the  bowel  appearing  to 
stimulate  the  secretion  of  bile,  or  at  all  events  to  promote  the  elimi- 


INTESTINAL  COLIC,  OB  ENTERALOIA.  209 

nation  of  bile  without  allowing  time  for  its  reabsorption.  A  tea- 
spoonful  of  castor  oil  may  be  given  to  a  child  of  the  age  of  ten 
months  or  more,  and  may  be  repeated  on  alternate  mornings  until 
the  habit  of  constipation  is  overcome.  Toward  the  end  of  the  first 
year  a  good  deal  of  colic  may  be  associated  with  intestinal  irregu- 
larities due  to  dentition,  but  in  these  cases,  as  a  rule,  the  more 
prominent  symptom  is  diarrhoea.  With  regard  to  treatment,  apart 
from  attention  to  the  condition  of  the  gums,  and  apart  from  the 
necessary  modifications  of  diet,  benefit  may  be  obtained  from  the 
use  of  ipecacuanha  wine,  or  even  from  the  employment  of  the  powder 
of  ipecacuanha  and  opium.  The  latter,  however,  as  a  preparation 
of  opium,  must  be  used  with  great  caution.  The  wine  is  the  safer 
remedy,  but  not  more  than  one  or  two  minims  should  be  given 
repeatedly,  on  account  of  the  readiness  with  which  it  may  promote 
nausea  and  even  vomiting.  In  very  young  children  who  are  much 
emaciated,  the  spasmodic  contraction  of  the  intestine,  which  is  the 
cause  of  colic,  may  often  be  witnessed.  Waves  of  contraction  are 
readily  traceable  over  the  abdominal  wall,  the  pain  diminishing  as 
the  little  nodule  of  firm  contraction  becomes  relaxed.  These  con- 
tractions are  frequently  witnessed  in  the  absence  of  either  constipa- 
tion or  diarrhoea,  and  they  appear  to  be  of  a  reflex,  neurotic  variety, 
since  they  improve  so  rapidly  during  the  administration  of  potas- 
sium or  ammonium  bromide. 

As  age  advances,  the  causes  of  colic  in  children  are  different  in 
character.  Frequently  pain  and  the  disturbance  of  sleep,  which 
results  from  pain,  are  both  due  to  the  irritation  of  worms.  In 
early  childhood  these  are  most  likely  to  be  in  the  form  of  thread 
worms,  which  may  excite  reflex  spasm  of  the  intestine,  or  even  reflex 
convulsions  from  the  irritation  that  ensues  from  their  movements. 
This  irritation  may  sometimes  be  due  to  worms  that  have  issued 
from  the  rectum  and  may  be  found  wandering  about  from  the  rec- 
tum to  the  vulva,  or  it  may  be  due  to  the  movements  of  worms 
within  the  rectum.  When  arising  from  worms,  colic  usually  occurs 
at  night,  and  the  child  wakes  pale  and  frightened,  and  perhaps 
screaming.  It  is  obviously  impossible  to  treat  this  symptom  sepa- 
rately without  attacking  the  entozoa.     {See  Thread  Worms.) 

Forms  of  colic  which  have  yet  to  be  mentioned  are  those  depend- 
ent upon  irregularities  of  the  nervous  system,  the  hysterical  and 
neuralgic  types.  With  regard  to  the  former,  although  spoken  of 
as  hysterical,  and  although  undoubtedly  associated  with  other  hys- 

14 


210  DIGESTION. 

terical  manifestations,  the  symptom  of  colic  frequently  depends 
directly  or  indirectly  either  upon  a  perverted  appetite  or  indiges- 
tible articles  of  food,  or  upon  some  injudicious  dietary  to  which  the 
patient  is  subjecting  herself.  Colic,  although  it  may  result  from 
the  irritation  produced  by  indigestible  articles  of  food,  or  from  the 
irritation  of  over-distention  of  the  alimentary  canal,  may  neverthe- 
less follow  upon  irregular  contractions  due  to  the  presence  of  an 
insufficient  amount  of  waste  material  in  the  intestine.  Many  cases 
of  this  hysterical  type  will  be  foand  to  be  connected  with  constipa- 
tion, which  is  best  overcome  by  breaking  down  the  rigid  rules  of 
restriction  which  so  many  of  these  patients  have  formed  for  them- 
selves. 

Although,  in  these  cases,  it  is  advisable  to  insist  upon  a  more 
liberal  dietary,  it  is  also  necessary  to  employ  some  of  the  antispas- 
modics. Preparations  of  zinc  are  often  beneficial.  The  sulphate 
can  be  given  as  a  pill,  in  doses  of  from  1  to  3  grains,  and  this 
amount  may  be  gradually  increased  if  the  pill  is  carefully  adminis- 
tered after  food,  so  that  the  irritant  effect  on  the  mucous  mem- 
brane of  the  stomach  is  only  gradually  exerted.  If  given  in  a 
larger  dose,  or  if  given  upon  an  empty  stomach,  this  drug  will 
be  likely  to  promote  nausea  or  even  vomiting.  In  place  of  the 
sulphate,  the  valerianate  may  be  employed,  in  doses  of  from  1  to 
3  grains,  or  the  ammoniated  tincture  of  valerian,  in  doses  of  J  to 
1  fluidrachm.  These  remedies  are  mainly  beneficial  to  the  hys- 
terical condition  causing  the  intestinal  colic,  and  they  probably 
exert  very  little,  if  any,  direct  influence  on  the  spasmodic  contrac- 
tion of  the  intestine.  It  is  more  uncertain,  however,  whether  the 
other  remedy  which  is  so  often  serviceable  in  these  cases — namely, 
asafoetida — may  not  possess  some  direct  curative  properties,  but  its 
constituents  have  been  said  to  be  inert  when  experimenters  tried  it 
upon  themselves.  The  selection  of  the  preparation  of  asafoetida  will, 
to  some  extent,  depend  upon  whether  the  practitioner  wishes  the 
patient  to  endure  the  moral  effect  of  taking  the  tincture  or  the  fetid 
spirit  of  ammonia,  consisting  of  spirit  of  ammonia  with  asafoetida, 
by  the  mouth,  or  whether  he  attributes  sufficient  physiological 
activity  to  the  aloes  and  asafoetida  pill  or  the  compound  galbanum 
pill.  Occasionally,  in  neuralgic  cases,  which  are  closely  linked  with 
the  hysterical,  the  activity  of  these  remedies  may  be  increased  by 
the  administration  of  preparations  of  arsenic.  While  this  drug  is 
being  taken  the  appetite  and  digestion  usually  increase  ;  more  food 


LEAD  COLIC.  211 

therefore  is  consumed,  and  one  of  the  fertile  sources  of  colic  is  thus 
removed.  The  liquor  potassii  arsenitis  may  be  added  to  the  tincture 
of  asafoetida  or  to  the  fetid  spirit  of  ammonia,  or,  if  the  patient  is 
taking  asafoetida  in  pill  form,  arsenious  acid  or  ferrous  arsenate  may 
conveniently  be  mixed  in  the  pill. 

Lead  Colic.  Lead  colic  is  so  severe  in  its  manifestations,  and 
its  treatment  is  so  different  from  the  foregoing,  that  it  demands  spe- 
cial consideration.  The  symptoms  of  lead  colic  differ  from  those 
just  described  mainly  in  their  greater  severity,  but  the  exciting 
causes  of  this  condition  are  extremely  various,  though  as  a  rule  the 
lead  finds  its  way  into  the  system,  owing  to  its  employment  in  the 
ordinary  work  of  the  patient.  Thus  lead  colic  is  common  among 
those  working  with  white  lead,  or  with  any  form  of  lead  in  fine 
powder,  and  it  is  most  likely  to  arise  when  these  workmen  take 
their  meals  in  the  middle  of  their  work,  especially  if  they  do  not 
trouble  to  wash  their  hands  before  eating.  It  may  also  result  from 
drinking  water  or  other  liquid  impregnated  with  lead,  beer  which 
has  stood  in  the  pipes  overnight  being  peculiarly  prone  to  give  rise 
to  this  condition,  and  I  have  known  it  to  occur  when  lead  had  been 
used  instead  of  bismuth  as  a  face  powder.  Recently  a  good  deal  of 
attention  has  been  directed  to  the  cases  of  lead-poisoning  occurring 
in  the  potteries  ;  but  whatever  the  cause  of  the  use  of  lead,  the 
dangers  connected  with  its  employment  can  be  greatly  diminished 
by  habits  of  personal  cleanliness  and  by  the  use  of  acid  drinks  and 
mild  saline  purgatives.  These  facts  are  well  recognized  by  most, 
employers  where  lead  is  used,  and  they  supply  quantities  of  very 
dilute  sulphuric  acid  for  the  workmen  to  drink. 

The  prominent  symptom  in  lead  colic  is  the  occurrence  of  severe- 
pain  in  the  region  of  the  umbilicus,  which  is  occasionally  relieved, 
by  pressure.  This  pain  is  almost  invariably  associated  with  consti- 
pation, with  emaciation,  and  with  increasing  pallor.  The  diminu- 
tion in  nutrition  is  frequently  the  result  of  loss  of  appetite,  due  to 
constipation,  though  undoubtedly  definite  lead  cachexia  exists.  The 
blue  line  along  the  gums,  which  is  so  often  enumerated  as  one  of  the 
symptoms,  is  really  to  be  regarded  as  a  diagnostic  indication,  since 
it  is  not  associated  with  any  altered  sensations. 

The  treatment  of  lead  colic  demands  measures  calculated  not  only 
to  relieve  the  pain  and  constipation,  but  also  to  remove  lead  which 
has  already  been  deposited  in  the  tissues.  With  regard  to  the  con- 
stipation, it  is  perhaps  best  dealt  with  by  the  administration  of 


212  DIGESTION. 

repeated  doses  of  magnesium  sulphate,  and  to  a  mixture  containing 
this  drug  small  quantities  of  diluted  sulphuric  acid  may  be  added, 
with  the  view  of  forming  an  insoluble  sulphate  of  lead  with  any 
lead  compound  that  may  remain  in  the  course  of  the  intestine. 
Magnesium  sulphate  may  be  given  occasionally  either  as  the  effer- 
vescing sulphate,  or  mixed  with  citric  acid  and  sodium  bicarbonate 
in  sufficient  quantity  to  form  an  effervescing  mixture.  Other  pur- 
gatives have  been  employed  for  this  condition,  but  they  do  not  give 
such  good  results.  The  vegetable  purgatives,  like  colocynth  or 
jalap,  may  increase  the  pain  of  lead  colic  by  causing  more  rapid 
contractions  of  the  muscular  wall  of  the  intestine  ;  while  magne- 
sium sulphate  causes  an  increased  flow  of  fluid  from  the  mucous 
lining  of  the  intestine  without  materially  altering  the  rapidity  of 
the  contractions. 

The  pain  of  lead  colic  may  sometimes  be  relieved  by  the  local 
application  of  opiates,  or  by  the  employment  of  fomentations  or 
poultices.  The  internal  administration  of  opium,  or  the  use  of  mor- 
phine hypodermatically,  may  sometimes  be  necessary  when  the  pain 
is  very  severe.  As  a  rule,  however,  it  is  well  to  avoid  these  drugs, 
since  they  favor  the  constipation  which  it  is  desirable  to  overcome. 

The  elimination  of  lead  from  the  system  may  be  effected  by  the 
administration  of  potassium  iodide,  but  it  is  well  to  employ  this 
drug  in  moderate  doses  of  5  grains  or  so,  and  to  continue  the  admin- 
istration for  a  length  of  time  rather  than  to  endeavor  to  produce  a 
strikingly  rapid  effect  by  larger  doses,  since  it  has  been  asserted  that 
fresh  symptoms  of  poisoning  may  occur  when  large  doses  of  potas- 
sium iodide  are  given,  owing  to  the  quantities  of  lead,  which  had 
previously  been  deposited  in  the  tissues,  being  again  passed  into  the 
circulation  in  the  form  of  the  soluble  iodide. 

As  the  patient  recovers,  it  is  necessary  to  employ  tonics  and 
bitters,  such  as  quinine,  calumba,  or  quassia,  and  to  continue  the 
use  of  an  occasional  dose  of  magnesium  sulphate  to  counteract  any 
return  of  constipation.  Should  he  be  obliged  to  return  to  the  same 
work,  it  will  be  well  to  give  him  directions  calculated  to  diminish 
the  risks  of  fresh  symptoms  of  lead-poisoning.  Apart  from  strict 
injunctions  concerning  cleanliness,  the  use  of  occasional  saline  pur- 
gatives, and  the  avoidance  of  alcoholic  stimulants,  it  may  be  neces- 
sary to  give  special  instructions  according  to  the  nature  of  the  work. 
Thus,  if  there  is  much  lead  in  the  form  of  a  dry  powder,  it  will  be 
desirable  for  him  to  use  a  respirator  of  muslin,  which  should  be  fre- 


CONSTIPATION.  213 

quently  cleansed  and  moistened.  It  is  also  necessary  to  caution  the 
individual  not  to  commence  work  before  taking  a  meal.  Recent 
observations  appear  to  indicate  that  when  lead  enters  the  system  by 
the  alimentary  canal,  it  is  most  active  during  the  intervals  between 
meals.  The  frequent  connection  between  the  symptoms  of  lead- 
poisoning,  of  gout,  and  of  chronic  kidney  disease,  has  been  fully 
dealt  with  in  another  work.  {See  Albuminuria  and  Bright's  Dis- 
ease.) Certainly  those  who  suffer  from  a  gouty  diathesis  are  more 
likely  to  develop  symptoms  of  lead-poisoning,  and  more  particu- 
larly so  if,  in  addition,  they  are  addicted  to  habits  of  alcoholism. 

Constipation.  Constipation,  with  which  colic  is  so  often  asso- 
ciated, agrees  with  it  in  being  a  symptom  rather  than  a  disease  ; 
nevertheless,  it  demands  separate  consideration  here  on  account  of 
its  frequency  and  on  account  of  the  discomforts  to  which  it  leads. 
Constipation  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  distinct  disease,  nor  is  it  symp- 
tomatic of  any  single  disease.  Although  it  may  result  from  diseased 
conditions,  it  is  far  more  frequently  the  consequence  of  habits  of  care- 
lessness than  of  any  pathological  change.  It  demands  treatment 
under  t^^  o  main  conditions  :  First,  when  it  occurs  as  an  accidental 
occasional  condition  ;  and,  secondly,  when  it  exists  fairly  continu- 
ously. In  the  former  case,  an  individual  of  previously  regular 
habits  may,  as  the  result  of  some  accident  or  circumstance,  either 
connected  with  this  occupation  or  with  his  dietary,  miss  the  regular 
morning  relief,  and  may  be  so  placed  during  the  greater  part  of  the 
day  as  not  to  be  able  to  attend  to  his  sensations  of  discomfort.  He 
may,  on  the  following  morning,  find  that  his  routine  is  disturbed 
and  that  he  has  some  slight  headache  and  loss  of  appetite.  Under 
these  conditions,  a  moderate  dose  of  magnesium  sulphate,  or  of  any 
effervescent  saline  purgative,  or  even  some  slight  modification  in 
diet,  such  as  the  use  of  brown  bread,  figs,  prunes,  or  other  mild 
laxatives,  may  be  sufficient  to  restore  the  normal  healthy  condition. 
With  such  individuals  the  employment  of  purgatives  of  greater  force 
would  be  undesirable,  since,  although  they  would  relieve  the  loaded 
rectum,  they  would  be  liable  to  be  followed  by  another  day  or  two 
of  inaction. 

The  whole  secret  of  the  treatment  of  constipation  lies  not  in 
emptying  the  alimentary  canal  but  in  the  stimulation  of  the  lower 
portion  of  the  bowel  to  resume  its  daily  routine.  It  will  be  found, 
therefore,  that  many  of  the  purgatives  enumerated  in  text-books 
of  materia  medica  will  not  be  so  much  as  mentioned  here  in  this 


214  DIGESTION. 

connection,  the  so-called  cholagogue  and  hydragogue  purgatives,  and 
still  more  the  drastic  purgatives,  being  of  service  in  special  condi- 
tions of  disease  rather  than  in  the  mild  form  of  irregularity  of  func- 
tion at  present  under  consideration.  In  dealing  with  more  chronic 
forms  of  constipation,  it  is  essential  to  make  careful  inquiries  as  to 
the  nature  of  the  error  to  which  the  individual  case  may  be  due  ; 
since  chronic  constipation  may  result  from  widely  different  causes, 
although  in  their  results  they  may,  as  a  rule,  be  traced  down  to  two 
conditions  only,  the  first  affecting  the  intestinal  contents,  the  second 
affecting  the  contractions  of  the  wall  of  the  intestine.  With  regard 
to  the  first,  the  errors  which  lead  to  chronic  constipation  are  gener- 
ally connected  with  faulty  habits  of  diet.  Constipation  may  be 
prompted  by  an  insufficient  supply  of  liquids,  a  fact  to  be  borne  in 
mind  whenever  a  diet  table  is  being  constructed  with  the  view  of 
reducing  the  amount  of  liquid  taken  by  the  patient.  Constipation 
will  also  sometimes  occur  when  there  has  been  a  large  drain  of  fluid 
from  the  system,  which  may  be  due  either  to  copious  perspiration 
during  muscular  exercise  or  may  occur  as  the  consequence  of  some 
disease  such  as  diabetes,  in  both  forms.  It  may  also  result  from  a 
dietary  which  is  rich  in  nutritious  elements  and  poor  in  waste  mate- 
rial, so  that  the  greater  portion  of  the  food  is  digested,  leaving  very 
little  residue  to  excite  the  peristaltic  action  of  the  intestine. 

Further,  it  may  be  due  to  insufficient  digestive  power,  owing  to 
defective  secretion  of  the  intestine,  of  the  pancreas,  or  liver.  Cases 
of  obstructive  jaundice,  in  which  the  amount  of  bile  reaching  the 
intestine  is  reduced,  are  frequently  associated  with  constipation. 
Under  these  conditions  there  are  doubtless  two  factors  at  work  : 
the  one  leading  to  imperfect  digestion  of  food,  the  other  to  imperfect 
stimulation  of  the  muscular  wall  of  the  intestine.  When  the  secre- 
tion of  bile  is  deficient  either  from  lack  of  exercise  or  from  over- 
stimulation of  the  liver  with  food  or  with  alcohol,  constipation  is 
again  liable  to  result.  Deficiency  in  the  contraction  of  the  wall  of 
the  intestine  may  occur  as  an  indication  of  weakness  during  conva- 
lescence from  wasting  diseases,  or  more  commonly  it  may  arise 
from  carelessness  and  inattention  to  the  calls  of  nature.  The  peri- 
staltic contractions  which  lead  to  the  evacuation  of  the  lower  part 
of  the  bowel  are  very  largely  under  the  influence  of  habit,  and 
when  this  habit  of  regularity  has  not  been  cultivated,  or  when  it 
has  been  wilfully  or  carelessly  neglected,  the  rectum  will  require  con- 
siderable stimulus  before  being  excited  to  contract. 


CONSTIPATION.  215 

There  appear  to  be  grounds  for  believing  that,  to  some  extent, 
constipation  may  depend  upon  deficient  circulation  through  the  wall 
of  the  intestine,  since  it  is  frequently  found  that  any  active  exer- 
tion which  increases  the  rapidity  of  the  circulation  will  counteract 
the  tendency  to  constipation.  It  is  on  this  account  that  those  forms 
of  active  exercise  are  so  often  recommended  which,  while  taken  in 
the  open  air,  involve  the  movement  of  the  muscles  of  the  abdominal 
wall  ;  thus,  for  example,  riding  is  frequently  beneficial,  and  it  is 
most  efficacious  when  it  can  be  taken  in  the  early  morning.  With 
the  same  object  a  short  ride  on  a  bicycle  may  be  recommended, 
when  the  patient's  circumstances  do  not  admit  of  horse  exercise  ; 
but  to  be  of  use,  no  form  of  muscular  exercise  should  be  carried  to 
excess,  since  free  perspiration  is  likely  to  be  followed  by  constipa- 
tion, owing  to  the  reduction  of  the  amount  of  fluid  in  the  circulation. 
Even  when  bicycle  riding  is  impossible,  relief  will  often  ensue  after 
various  bodily  movements  of  a  mild  gymnastic  character,  which  may 
be  carried  out  in  the  open  air.  The  use  of  dumb-bells  should  be 
encouraged,  although  greater  benefit  will  follow  the  employment  of 
one  or  other  of  the  modern  forms  of  apparatus  for  the  development 
of  the  chest  and  muscles  of  the  arms,  since  with  the  latter  the  body 
is  bent  forward  and  the  muscular  contractions  of  the  abdominal  walls 
are  called  into  play. 

Occasionally,  in  elderly  individuals,  the  contractions  of  the  intes- 
tine may  be  stimulated  more  directly  by  massage  of  the  abdominal 
wall,  the  contents  of  the  abdomen  being  kneaded  from  side  to  side 
in  the  direction  of  the  course  of  contraction  of  the  colon. 

Among  younger  and  more  vigorous  patients  the  same  object  may 
be  attained  by  the  daily  use  of  the  cold  sponge  bath.  The  rationale 
of  the  action  is  a  little  difficult  to  explain,  but  possibly  it  results 
from  the  stimulus  to  the  circulation  that  is  induced  by  the  cold  shock, 
although  in  all  probability  the  subsequent  brisk  movements  and  the 
pressure  over  the  abdominal  wall  serve  to  stimulate  peristalsis. 

Short  of  these  various  forms  of  somewhat  energetic  muscular 
movements,  a  good  deal  of  relief  is  often  obtained  from  an  increased 
amount  of  daily  exercise  in  walking.  Constipation  very  often  is 
associated  with  sedentary  studious  habits,  and  daily  exercise,  espe- 
cially if  taken  in  the  early  morning,  may  afford  relief.  Frequently 
the  intestinal  contractions  may  be  further  stimulated  by  an  increase 
in  the  amount  of  liquid  taken  when  fasting.  Some  patients  prefer 
taking  a  glass  of  cold  water  on  going  to  bed,  or  on  first  rising, 


216  DIGESTION. 

though  the  shock  is  sometimes  found  to  be  extremely  unpleasant, 
and  the  beneficial  effect  may  often  be  obtained  as  well  from  swallow- 
ing a  glass  of  fairly  warm  water.  The  cup  of  tea  which  is  so  fre- 
quently taken  on  waking  undoubtedly  owes  its  action  to  the 
increased  supply  of  liquid  rather  than  to  any  direct  stimulation  due 
to  the  tea  itself,  since  tea,  especially  when  strong,  is  more  likely  to 
induce  constipation  on  account  of  the  tannin  it  contains.  The  same 
explanation,  in  all  probability,  holds  good  for  the  effect  of  black 
coffee.  In  some  individuals  this  appears  to  act  as  a  laxative,  but 
the  contractions  of  the  intestine  are  more  likely  to  be  induced  by  the 
temperature  at  which  the  coffee  is  taken  than  by  active  principle 
contained  in  coffee,  since  when  coffee  is  allowed  to  cool  very  little 
intestinal  stimulant  action  remains. 

Careful  attention  to  the  diet  will  often  serve  to  remove  the  trouble- 
some habit  of  constipation.  It  is  often  necessary  to  encourage  the 
patient  to  take  some  form  of  food  which  contains  a  relatively  large 
proportion  of  waste  indigestible  material.  This  can  be  conveniently 
obtained  from  the  use  of  fresh  vegetables,  more  particularly  green 
vegetables,  but  these  must  be  well  boiled  and  well  masticated,  since 
otherwise  they  might  promote  indigestion.  Various  forms  of  fruit 
will  also  be  beneficial,  and  the  relief  which  they  afford  may  be  due 
either  to  the  presence  of  some  laxative  principle  or  to  the  gentle 
stimulus  afforded  by  indigestible  particles.  Figs,  either  well  soaked 
previously  to  being  eaten  or  taken  after  meals  and  well  masticated, 
will  often  act  as  sufficient  stimulus,  owing  to  the  slight  irritation 
produced  by  the  small  seeds  they  contain  ;  while  stewed  apples, 
stewed  prunes,  tamarinds,  oranges,  and  bananas  possess  a  laxative 
action  well  recognized  among  the  laity.  Grapes  are  also  frequently 
used  with  the  same  object,  but  it  is  advisable  to  caution  the  patient 
not  to  eat  the  skins,  and  either  to  masticate  the  seeds  or  else  to  reject 
them.  With  the  same  view,  marmalade  is  often  taken  at  breakfast 
time ;  it  acts  as  a  mechanical  stimulus  from  the  small  pieces  of 
orange  peel  it  contains,  and  as  a  laxative  on  account  of  the  sugar  and 
the  neutral  salts  of  vegetable  acids.  Strawberry  and  raspberry  jams 
are  less  efficacious  perhaps,  but  still  of  service,  while  for  children 
golden  syrup  and  honey  frequently  produce  a  fairly  powerful  laxa- 
tive action.  The  older  form  of  black  treacle,  which  has  so  largely 
passed  out  of  use,  is  yet  more  powerful  as  a  laxative,  and  taken 
with  brown  bread,  or  with  oatmeal  porridge,  it  forms  a  very  useful 
adjunct  to  the  resources  of  the  nursery. 


CONSTIPATION.  217 

The  laxative  action  of  stewed  prunes  may  be  greatly  increased  by 
the  device  recommended  by  Lauder  Brunton.  He  says  that  a  few 
senna  leaves  or  pods  should  be  put  in  a  small  muslin  bag,  tied  up 
at  the  end,  and  dropped  into  the  pan  in  which  the  prunes  are  stew- 
ing. In  this  way  the  active  principle  of  the  senna,  cathartic  acid, 
is  dissolved,  and  the  flavor  of  the  prunes  is  not  materially  affected, 
while  their  action  is  greatly  increased.  Frequently  the  substitution 
of  brown  bread,  or  of  whole  meal  bread,  for  the  bread  made  of  fine 
Avhite  flour  will  favor  daily  action  of  the  bowel.  These  forms  of 
bread  leave  enough  indigestible  material  to  stimulate  the  bowel, 
while  in  white  wheaten  flour  not  only  have  the  indigestible  sub- 
stances been  carefully  removed,  but  frequently  alum  has  been  used 
to  increase  the  whiteness  of  the  bread. 

With  habitual  constipation,  it  is  generally  advisable  to  reduce  the 
amount  of  meat  that  is  taken,  or,  at  all  events,  to  increase  the  pro- 
portion of  vegetable  fibre.  With  some  constitutions,  eggs  are  found 
to  favor  constipation,  especially  if  they  are  hard-boiled  ;  sometimes 
indeed  this  result  will  follow  their  employment  in  any  form,  even 
when  made  into  puddings  with  milk,  and  with  farinaceous  sub- 
stances. Milk  is  constipating,  especially  if  taken  cold,  though  the 
foreign  plan  of  taking  a  small  amount  of  coffee  with  much  warm 
milk  in  the  early  morning  certainly  helps  the  daily  action  of  the 
bowel.  On  account  of  a  tendency  to  obesity,  many  people  avoid 
butter  and  fat,  but  the  laxative  effect  of  fresh  butter  with  meals,  or 
of  olive  oil  with  salad,  may  sometimes  be  sufficient  to  overcome 
mild  cases  of  constipation.  The  laxative  action  of  oil  is  frequently 
well  seen  in  chidren,  whose  digestion  improves  during  the  time  that 
cod-liver  oil  is  being  taken  ;  in  fact,  cod-liver  oil  has  occasionally 
to  be  discontinued  when  it  promotes  undue  diarrhoea. 

It  should  be  remembered  that  a  great  deal  will  still  depend  upon 
the  habits  of  the  individual,  even  when  following  any  of  the  fore- 
going hygienic  and  dietetic  principles.  Time  should  be  allowed 
daily  at  the  same  hour  for  attention  to  the  calls  of  nature,  and  the 
patient  should  make  some  efforts  whether  there  are  any  sensations 
of  desire  or  not.  The  habit  of  thus  attempting  daily  to  obtain  relief 
at  the  same  hour  will  frequently  be  attended  with  success.  It  is 
especially  important  to  encourage  the  habit  of  regularity  in  children, 
who  are  prone  to  be  thoughtless  ;  in  women,  who  from  feelings  of 
modesty  are  perhaps  likely  to  fall  into  habits  of  carelessness  ;  and 
in  city  men,  who  from  late  rising  frequently  do  not  allow  time  to 


218  DIGESTION. 

attend  to  this  duty.  It  is  necessary  to  lay  some  stress  upon  thus 
encouraging  the  habit  of  regularity,  since  so  often  patients  remain 
content  with  the  occasional  employment  of  strong  purgatives,  which 
may  be  followed  by  constipation  for  two  or  three  days.  The  whole 
of  the  efforts  of  the  patient  and  of  the  doctor  should  be  directed  to 
the  establishment  of  normal  habits  of  regularity  rather  than  to 
obtaining  relief  by  occasional  violent  action. 

With  regard  to  the  medicinal  treatment  of  constipation,  much 
will  depend  upon  the  estimate  that  has  been  formed  of  the  nature  of 
the  condition,  and  also  upon  the  circumstances  under  which  the 
patient  first  comes  under  treatment ;  thus,  for  example,  it  is  often 
necessary  to  effect  rapid  and  free  evacuation  of  the  bowel  at  the 
commencement  of  acute  febrile  disorders,  and  the  treatment  under 
such  circumstances  must  be  very  different  from  that  adopted  for 
the  relief  of  chronic  constipation.  For  rapidity  of  action,  saline 
purgatives  will  perhaps  be  sufficiently  satisfactory.  Magnesium 
sulphate  and  magnesium  carbonate  can  be  given  together  in  the  well- 
known  white  mixture  of  most  hospital  pharmacopoeias.  Frequently 
this  is  taken  rather  more  readily  as  an  effervescing  draught ;  the 
effervescing  magnesium  sulphate  may  be  employed  with  this  object, 
or  due  proportions  of  sodium  bicarbonate  and  citric  and  tartaric  acid 
may  be  added  to  the  ordinary  white  mixture  to  render  it  efferves- 
cent. When  given  thus  in  these  cases,  these  drugs  rarely  require 
repetition,  and  it  suffices  to  administer  a  single  fairly  strong  dose 
as  a  draught.  Occasionally,  however,  in  the  course  of  acute  febrile 
disorders,  it  is  desirable  to  continue  the  laxative  effect,  and  magne- 
sium sulphate  will  then  be  more  conveniently  given  in  smaller  doses 
distributed  over  the  day.  Another  very  favorite  saline  purgative 
is  sodium  phosphate,  which  has  the  advantage  of  mild  action  and  of 
comparatively  little  taste.  This  is  frequently  employed  for  children, 
and  can  be  easily  given  mixed  with  soup  without  the  child  knowing 
that  any  medicine  has  been  taken.  The  dose  must  be  regulated 
according  to  the  age  of  the  patient ;  for  adults,  when  given  on  a 
single  occasion  as  a  draught,  from  ^  to  J  ounce  may  be  administered ; 
but  if  given  frequently,  the  adult  dose  is  from  J  to  2  drachms. 
This  drug  also  may  be  administered  in  an  effervescent  form,  which 
may  be  taken  in  larger  doses  than  the  official  salt.  The  effervescent 
sodium  phosphate,  although  not  official  in  the  United  States  Pharma- 
copceia,  is  kept  by  all  druggists.  Sodium  sulphate  is  also  occasion- 
ally used  in  preference  to  magnesium  sulphate,  and  can  be  given  in 


CONSTIPA  TION.  219 

the  same  dose,  or  the  effervescent  magnesium  sulphate  may  be 
found  to  be  more  agreeable.  Compared  with  the  phosphate,  the 
taste  is  much  more  unpleasant,  being  not  only  saline,  but  bitter. 
This  salt  is  one  of  the  principal  constituents  of  many  of  the 
natural  mineral  waters  used  as  laxatives.  Carlsbad  water  con- 
tains both  sodium  sulphate  and  bicarbonate,  together  with  many 
other  salts  of  less  efficacy  ;  hence  Carlsbad  water  is  used  as  a  mild 
laxative,  while  the  Carlsbad  salts — which  can  be  procured  either  as 
the  natural  salt,  obtained  by  evaporation,  or  in  the  form  of  the 
sodium  sulphate  and  the  sodium  bicarbonate,  mixed  in  the  same 
proportions — are  occasionally  used  at  the  commencement  of  febrile 
attacks,  or  indeed  whenever  it  is  desired  to  obtain  a  moderately 
rapid  action  of  the  intestine  with  the  evacuation  of  a  fairly  large 
amount  of  watery  secretion. 

When  treating  chronic  constipation  medicinally,  it  is  not  always 
necessary  to  employ  laxatives  or  even  purgatives.  Thus,  for  example, 
when  the  urine  is  found  to  be  of  high  specific  gravity,  and  to  con- 
tain considerable  quantities  of  urates,  a  few  doses  of  potassium  bicar- 
bonate may  suffice  to  restore  the  action  of  the  bowel  at  the  same 
time  that  the  condition  of  the  urine  is  rendered  more  normal.  It 
may  be  stated,  however,  in  general  terms,  that  it  is  better,  in  the 
treatment  of  chronic  constipation,  to  employ  drugs  of  greater  purga- 
tive power  occasionally,  and  it  is  therefore  necessary,  in  the  indi- 
vidual case,  to  ascertain  the  smallest  dose  of  any  drug  which  can  be 
counted  upon  to  produce  the  desired  effect.  It  is  then  well  to  repeat 
this  dose  for  two  or  three  days  in  succession,  and  afterward  to  trust 
to  the  restoration  of  the  habit  of  regularity  with  the  discontinuance 
of  the  medicine.  It  is  also  essential  to  select  the  remedy,  which 
it  is  proposed  to.  employ,  with  due  regard  to  the  habits  of  life  and 
social  standing  of  the  patients,  smce  many  remedies  which  have  but 
slight  action  upon  a  strong  Avorkingman  might  violently  purge  deli- 
cate, nervous,  excitable  patients  of  a  higher  social  grade  ;  thus,  for 
example,  a  remedy  which  might  be  administered  with  great  advan- 
tage to  a  cabman,  a  Covent  Garden  porter,  or  a  navvy,  would  be 
likely  to  produce  disastrous  results  upon  a  delicate,  nervous  lady  of 
fashion. 

It  is  also  advisable,  before  embarking  upon  a  course  of  treatment 
for  chronic  constipation,  to  ascertain  if  possible  the  cause  of  the  con- 
dition. Frequently  it  may  depend  upon  a  comparative  insensibility 
of  the  lower  part  of  the  bowel,  which  has  been  gradually  produced 


220  DIGESTION. 

by  the  habit  of  disregarding  the  normal  calls  for  relief.  In  elderly 
patients,  more  particularly,  chronic  constipation  is  apt  to  result  from 
this  form  of  deficient  reflex  excitability,  and  the  rectum  and  sigmoid 
flexure  may  be  loaded  with  feces  which  require  removal,  either  by 
the  employment  of  enemata  or  by  suppositories. 

When  the  habit  of  constipation  has  been  acquired,  the  contents  of 
the  lower  portion  of  the  bowel  tend  to  become  hard  and  dry,  and 
diflicult  to  remove  by  the  administration  of  laxatives  or  purgatives 
by  the  mouth,  and  it  may  even  be  necessary,  in  severe  cases,  to  break 
down  these  fecal  masses  by  the  finger  or  by  some  mechanical  agency, 
such  as  the  handle  of  a  spoon,  before  the  rectum  and  sigmoid  flexure 
can  be  satisfactorily  evacuated.  Before  resorting  to  these  measures, 
however,  it  is  well  to  await  the  results  of  the  use  of  enemata,  and 
in  some  cases  it  is  advisable  to  employ  a  comparatively  large  amount 
of  liquid,  introduced  into  the  rectum  by  a  long,  flexible  tube.  The 
passage  of  fluid  past  the  sigmoid  flexure  may  be  facilitated  by 
employing  the  rectal  tube,  with  the  patient  resting  on  his  knees,  the 
head  and  upper  part  of  the  body  being  depressed,  so  that  the  fluid 
shall  gravitate  gently  along  the  course  of  the  descending  colon.  In 
this  way  a  large  quantity  of  fluid  may  be  introduced,  although  it  is 
diflicult,  and  perhaps  unsafe,  to  attempt  to  pass  the  flexible  tube 
beyond  the  commencement  of  the  sigmoid  flexure. 

The  introduction  of  a  drachm  or  so  of  glycerin  will  frequently  be 
followed  by  a  copious  secretion  of  fluid  from  the  wall  of  the  rectum, 
which  may  be  sufficient  to  facilitate  the  expulsion  of  hardened  feces. 
The  glycerin  may  be  injected  with  a  small  enema  syringe,  or  the 
same  result  may  be  obtained  by  the  use  of  one  or  more  glycerin  sup- 
positories, which  are  now  official.  These  suppositories  are  extremely 
convenient  for  children  when  it  is  desired  to  empty  the  lower  part 
of  the  bowel ;  they  can  be  easily  introduced,  and  they  act  with 
comparative  rapidity,  but  it  must  be  remembered  that,  by  these 
measures,  we  only  obtain  the  evacuation  of  masses  which  may  be 
obstructing  the  lower  portion  of  the  bowel,  and  that  the  peristaltic 
action  of  the  whole  length  of  the  bowel  is  not  directly  affected. 

Inaction  of  the  bowel  may  result  either  from  inefficient  secretions 
or  from  inefficient  contractions,  and  the  class  of  remedy  which 
should  be  employed  must  depend  upon  the  estimate  that  has  been 
formed  of  the  relative  importance  of  these  two  conditions.  Many 
of  the  laxatives  appear  to  stimulate  secretion  both  of  mucus  and  of 
intestinal  juice,  or  sometimes,  though  more  rarely,  to  favor  the  for- 


CONSTIPATION.  221 

mation  of  a  larger  amount  of  bile.  When  the  fluid  character  of  the 
contents  of  the  intestine  can  be  thus  increased,  there  will  naturally 
be  a  greater  frequency  of  peristalsis,  though  it  is  possible,  occasion- 
ally, to  cause  a  very  large  increase  in  the  fluid  contents  of  the  intes- 
tine without  purgation  ;  thus,  if  the  salines  are  given  at  some 
inconvenient  hour,  a  large  quantity  of  fluid  may  be  poured  into  the 
upper  part  of  the  intestine,  and  reabsorbed  from  the  lower  part.  On 
the  other  hand,  some  purgatives  and  some  laxatives  appear  to  pro- 
duce their  action  mainly  by  stimulation  of  the  peristaltic  move- 
ments, and  thus  the  contents  of  the  intestine  will  be  hurried  onward, 
without  any  necessary  increase  in  the  quantity  of  liquid. 

Among  the  drugs  which  are  commonly  used  to  excite  peristalsis, 
cascara  sagrada  occupies  a  foremost  place  ;  but  others,  such  as 
manna,  tamarinds,  aloes,  and  podophyllin,  are  very  often  used,  and 
are  preferred  by  some  patients.  Cascara  sagrada  is  credited  with 
the  power  of  acting  as  an  intestinal  tonic,  and  it  has  often  been 
claimed  for  this  drug  that  it  is  possible  to  gradually  reduce  the  dose 
as  the  habit  of  regularity  becomes  re-established,  and  it  is  further  held 
that  it  may,  if  necessary,  be  continued  for  a  length  of  time  without 
requiring  any  increase  of  the  dose.  Cascara  sagrada  may  be  given, 
either  as  the  solid  extract,  in  doses  of  from  2  to  8  grains,  which 
may  be  combined  with  carminatives,  in  a  pill ;  or  as  the  fluid 
extract,  which  is  administered  in  doses  of  from  J  to  1  fluidrachm, 
also  with  carminatives.  Although  not  official,  there  is  to  be  found 
in  the  market  various  aromatic  syrups,  elixirs,  and  cordials  with 
doses  of  from  1  to  4  fluidrachms  ;  these  preparations  are  much  more 
readily  taken  and  much  less  nauseous  than  the  fluid  extract. 

When  cascara  sagrada  was  first  introduced  it  was  a  somewhat 
unreliable  preparation,  the  extract  and  fluid  extract  varying  in 
strength,  so  that  the  same  dose  could  not  always  be  counted  upon 
to  produce  the  same  results.  But,  apart  from  variations  in  the 
drag,  there  are  also  differences  of  temperament  to  be  reckoned  with, 
since  the  same  dose  of  the  same  preparation  will  occasionally  pro- 
duce powerful  purgation  in  some  individuals,  while  it  hardly  seems 
to  afEect  others.  In  my  experience,  cascara  sagrada  is  a  purgative 
of  somewhat  late  action,  and  it  is  sometimes  attended  with  con- 
siderable discomfort  shortly  before  the  evacuation  of  the  bowel.  I 
have  frequently  known  moderate  doses  taken  overnight  without 
result  until  the  following  evening,  when  two  or  more  copious  reliefs 
have  been  obtained.     The  activity  of  this  drug  can,  however,  be 


222  DIGESTION. 

regulated  for  the  individual  by  moderation  of  the  dose ;  and  with 
habitual  constipation,  this  remedy  is  perhaps  the  one  which  has 
given  the  greatest  satisfaction,  although  the  bitter,  nauseous  taste 
may  cause  some  patients  to  rebel  against  the  continued  employment 
of  the  bitter  liquid  preparations. 

Of  the  other  laxatives  above  mentioned,  manna  is  occasionally 
employed  for  children,  but,  on  account  of  its  sweet  taste,  it  is  a  pro- 
verbially difficult  drug  to  keep  in  museum  collections,  and  equally 
so  in  dispensaries.  Tamarinds  possess  laxative  properties,  and 
enter  into  the  composition  of  the  confection  of  senna  of  the  United 
States  Pharmacopoeia,  but  they  are  not  to  be  confused  with  the 
so-called  tamar  indien,  which  is  a  compound  of  several  laxatives, 
and  is  sold  as  a  proprietary  preparation.  Aloes  is  frequently 
employed  as  a  laxative,  although  it  is  easy  to  obtain  stronger 
purgative  results  with  a  slight  increase  of  the  dose.  In  all  prob- 
ability, aloes  acts  both  by  stimulation  of  the  contractions  of  the 
muscular  wall  of  the  intestine  and  by  exciting  reflex  secretion  from 
the  mucous  membrane.  It  affects  mainly  the  lower  part  of  the  large 
intestine — a  fact  demonstrated  partly  by  the  length  of  time  before 
it  acts,  and  partly  by  the  degree  of  irritation  and  fulness  of  the 
hemorrhoidal  system  which  follows  its  employment.  This  effect 
upon  the  hemorrhoidal  system  constitutes  the  chief  objection  to  the 
frequent  use  of  aloes,  especially  in  elderly  people  who  have  any 
tendency  to  piles ;  it  therefore  becomes  necessary  to  remember 
that  there  are  very  few  of  the  vegetable  purgative  pills  in  the 
Pharmacopoeia  that  do  not  contain  aloes.  It  is  a  remedy  which,  if 
given  alone,  is  apt  to  produce  considerable  discomfort,  and  its  effects 
require  to  be  moderated  by  administration  with  less  potent  purga- 
tives and  with  carminatives.  The  extract  of  aloes  may  be  employed, 
when  alone,  in  doses  of  from  1  to  4  grains,  according  to  the  effect 
desired  ;  but  when  mixed  with  other  purgatives  it  is  better  to  reduce 
the  amount  of  the  extract,  and  when  made  up  into  a  pill,  to  admin- 
ister it  in  the  dose  of  \  grain  ;  this  dose  can  be  given  with  2  or  li 
grains  of  compound  extract  of  colocynth,  and  with  1  grain  of  extract 
of  hyoscyamus.  Some  patients  find  this  pill  unduly  powerful,  and 
it  is  then  advisable  to  reduce  the  amount  of  colocynth  and  to  sub- 
stitute \  grain  of  extract  of  nux  vomica,  and  perhaps  to  add  \  grain 
of  podophyllum  resin. 

Although  several  of  these  purgatives  produce  much  griping  and 
discomfort  if  used  alone,  when  given  in  combination  in  small  doses 


CONSTIPATION.  223 

their  action  is  generally  free  from  these  disadvantages.  Podophyl- 
lum resin,  which  is  often  termed  podophyllin,  is  somewhat  like 
cascara  sagrada  in  the  uncertainty  of  its  action,  small  doses  some- 
times producing  very  disproportionate  effects.  Many  patients,  how- 
ever, are  in  the  habit  of  taking  a  small  amount  either  of  the  resin 
or  of  the  tincture  whenever  troubled  with  headache  or  "  biliousness," 
which  they  attribute  to  inaction  of  the  liver  and  deficient  action  of 
the  intestine.  This  drug,  although  active  even  in  small  doses,  is  not 
often  followed  by  constipation. 

Among  the  unofficial  preparations  which  are  frequently  used  may 
be  mentioned  a  compound  podophyllin  pill,  consisting  of  \  grain  of 
the  resin  of  podophyllum,  Barbadoes  aloes  1  grain,  capsicum  J  grain, 
green  extract  of  belladonna  \  grain,  made  up  with  glycerin  of  trag- 
acanth.  Podophyllum,  as  a  rule,  is  rather  too  active  for  frequent 
employment,  but  it  has  been  used  Avith  aloes  and  quinine,  forming 
a  dinner  pill  for  cases  of  habitual  constipation.  The  proportions 
which  have  been  found  serviceable  are  the  following  : 


li .  — Quinine  sulphate   . 
Podophyllum  resin 
Milk  sugar     .... 
Green  extract  of  belladonna  . 
Extract  of  aloes     . 


gr-  h 
gr-  j. 


Rhubarb  is  often  employed  in  habitual  constipation,  and  it  is  also 
used  occasionally  in  the  treatment  of  diarrhoea,  dependent  upon  irri- 
tant substances  in  the  alimentary  canal.  The  amount  of  rhubarb 
to  be  employed  for  these  two  purposes  will  be  very  different.  In 
the  latter  case,  when  it  is  desired  to  empty  the  intestine  rapidly,  and 
to  induce  constipation  by  the  astringency  of  the  rheo-tannic  acid,  a 
large  dose  is  required  ;  but  when  it  is  desired  to  use  rhubarb  as  a 
dinner  pill,  smaller  proportions  must  be  employed,  and  these  are 
commonly  combined  with  extract  of  hyoscyamus,  which  moderates 
the  activity  and  favors  the  restoration  of  regular  peristaltic  contrac- 
tions. Compound  rhubarb  powder,  which  contains  magnesia  and 
ginger,  is  often  used  as  a  laxative  for  children.  More  popular, 
perhaps,  for  adults,  is  the  compound  liquorice  powder  of  the 
Pharmacopoeia,  whose  activity  is  dependent  upon  the  admixture  of 
senna  and  sulphur.  This  is  readily  taken  in  doses  of  a  teaspoonful 
and  upward,  and  can  be  frequently  repeated  without  any  deleterious 
effects.     Some  practitioners  prefer  the  confection  of  senna  as  a  mild 


224  DIGESTION. 

laxative  for  general  employment.  This  confection  contains  several 
simple  laxatives  of  the  Pharmaeopceia,  such  as  figs,  tamarinds, 
and  prunes,  and  some  children  take  it  readily  Most  of  the  other 
preparations  of  senna  are  employed  as  occasional  purgatives  to 
clear  the  bowel  rapidly,  rather  than  as  laxatives  for  the  treatment 
of  chronic  constipation.  Castor  oil  is  also  of  service  in  the  same 
class  of  cases,  and  it  is  credited  with  the  power  of  continuous  action 
along  the  whole  length  of  the  alimentary  canal.  It  is  a  drug  of 
considerable  value  for  occasional  employment,  more  particularly  in 
children,  but  its  utility  is  very  greatly  discounted  by  its  nauseous 
taste  and  by  the  straggles  which  generally  ensue  when  its  forcible 
administration  is  attempted. 

The  employment  of  sulphur,  as  a  laxative  for  habitual  constipa- 
tion, is  most  beneficial  when  this  condition  is  associated  with  a 
rheumatic  or  rheumatoid  tendency.  In  the  constipation  of  rheuma- 
toid arthritis,  considerable  relief  is  frequently  experienced  from  the 
use  every  night  of  fairly  large  doses  (60  to  120  grains)  of  confection 
of  sulphur  of  the  British  Pharmacopoeia ;  but  inasmuch  as  this  prep- 
aration may  be  objected  to,  either  on  account  of  its  taste  or  its 
appearance,  the  sulphur  lozenge  is  often  preferred. 

The  efficacy  of  any  of  the  above  remedies  is  frequently  increased 
by  the  admixture  of  nux  vomica.  The  extract  of  nux  vomica,  in 
doses  of  \  grain  and  upward,  may  be  added  to  most  of  the  purga- 
tive pills,  while  the  tincture  in  doses  of  from  5  to  15  minims  may 
be  given  in  combination  with  liquid  purgative  preparations. 

The  foregoing  account  by  no  means  exhausts  the  list  of  laxatives 
or  purgatives  which  are  employed  in  the  treatment  of  chronic  con- 
stipation, and  it  also  takes  no  account  of  the  stronger  purgatives 
which  are  used  in  the  course  of  other  diseases  with  the  view  of 
rapidly  reducing  the  blood-pressure,  or  of  altering  the  amount  of 
fluid  contained  within  the  vessels,  and  thus  favoring  the  reabsorp- 
tion  of  dropsical  or  other  effusions.  Mention  of  these  drugs  will  be 
found  in  connection  with  the  various  diseases  for  which  they  are 
especially  adapted. 

The  following  prescriptions  for  mixtures  to  be  taken  once,  twice, 
or  three  times  a  day,  are  in  common  use  in  various  London  hospitals  : 

R .  — Magnesii  sulphatis  .         .         .         .         .         .  3  ss. 

Potassii  citratis       .......  gr.  xx. 

Tincturse  hyoscyami        ......  1Ttv. 

Aquse     .  .  .  .         .         .  .       q.  s.  ad  ^j. 


CONSTIPATION. 


225 


R.- 


-Magnesii  sulphatis 
Aquse  pimentse 
Infusi  rosEe  acidi     . 


R. — Magnesii  sulphatis 

Infusi  gentianse  compositi, 

Jbe. — Magnesii  sulphatis 

Acidi  sulphurici  diluti  . 
Olei  carophylli 
Aquse  destillatse 

K. — Magnesii  carbonatis 
Magnesii  sulphatis 
Aqu?e  menthie  piperitte  . 

Be .  — Magnesii  sulphatis 
Magnesii  carbonatis 
Aquae  nienthse  piperitse  . 

R. — Potassii  bicarbonatis 
Magnesii  sulphatis 
Tincturse  hyoscyami 
Mucilaginis  acaci?e 
Aqufe    .... 

R. — Pulveris  rhei 

Magnesii  carbonatis 
Aquffi  menthse  piperitse  . 

R. — Pulveris  rhei 

Magnesii  carbonatis 
Sodii  bicarbonatis  . 
Pulveris  ipecacuanhse     . 
Aquse  menthse  piperitse  . 

R. — Pulveris  rhei 

Sodii  bicarbonatis  . 
Tincturse  zingiberis 
Aquse  ammonise  fortioris 
Aquse  menthse  piperitse  . 

R . — Pulveris  rhei 

Magnesii  carbonatis 
Spiritus  ammonise  aromatici 
Aquse  pimentse 

R .  — Infusi  rhei     . 

Tincturse  gentianse  composites 
Sodii  bicarbonatis  . 
Spiritus  chloroformi 
Aquse  menthse  piperitse  . 


3.  ad 


gr.  xl. 
s.  ad     §j. 

•  3J- 

•  ij. 

•  m^- 

ij- 

gr.  X. 

5SS. 

gr.  XV. 
gr.  XX. 
lUxv. 

gr.  V. 
gr.  XV. 

gr.  viij. 
gr.  XV. 
gr.  X. 

gj- 

gr.  X. 
gr.  XV. 

m^- 
mij- 


s.  ad 


ad 


ad 


.  gr.  XV. 

.  3SS. 

.  3SS. 

s.  ad  5j. 


3SS. 

3SS. 

gr.  X 


s.  ad 


15 


226 


DIGESTION. 

Be. 

— Sodii  bicai-bonatis 

•      gr.  X 

Spiritus  chloroformi       .... 

■   m^- 

Spiritus  menthae  piperitse 

■      lUv. 

Tincturse  rhei 

•     3J. 

Infusi  gentiaiiEe  compositi        . 

^ss. 

R. 

— Potassii  et  sodii  tartratis 

•      5Jss. 

Potassii  tartratis     ..... 

•     3J- 

Extractum  sennse  fiuidum 

.     3SS. 

Aquse q. 

s.  ad      Ij. 

Tympanites.  Tympanites  is  a  symptom  which  occurs  in  connec- 
tion with  numerous  diseases  of  different  nature  and  of  various  origin, 
and  as  a  rule  it  is  dependent  upon  some  form  of  obstruction  m  the 
course  of  the  intestine.  It  may  also  frequently  result  from  chronic 
dyspepsia,  or  it  may  occur  in  connection  with  chronic  constipation, 
with  peritonitis,  and  with  other  conditions  indicative  of  atony  of  the 
intestine.  This  distention  of  the  intestine  may  sometimes  reach 
great  proportions,  and  may  cause  interference  with  the  freedom  of 
respiration,  and  even  with  the  action  of  the  heart. 

In  the  milder  conditions  the  treatment  is  that  of  the  cause  ;  thus, 
any  form  of  obstruction  should,  if  possible,  be  dealt  with  before 
any  strenuous  efforts  are  made  to  interfere  with  the  tympanites.  In 
constipation  and  dyspepsia  the  indications  can  readily  be  followed, 
and  have  indeed  already  been  mentioned  in  the  foregoing  pages  ; 
they  include  the  employment  of  laxatives  or  of  purgatives,  and 
possibly  the  use  of  enemata  of  turpentine,  which  may  favor  the 
expulsion  of  flatus,  It  has  been  recommended  tliat  the  flatus  should 
be  removed  by  the  introduction  of  a  long  piece  of  soft,  flexible  rubber 
tubing,  which,  well  oiled,  should  be  passed  as  far  as  possible  into 
the  rectum.  It  has  been  thought  that  by  this  means  the  flatus 
might  be  drawn  off,  even  though  the  intestine  should  be  in  an  atonic 
condition  and  deficient  in  contractile  force.  I  have  never  had  occa- 
sion to  employ  this  method,  and  although  with  a  tube  large  quan- 
tities of  liquid  may  be  passed  into  the  descending  colon  by  suitable 
posture  and  by  suitable  pressure,  I  believe  it  is  somewhat  doubtful 
whether  a  soft  rubber  tube  can  ever  be  passed  beyond  the  sigmoid 
flexure  ;  for  although  a  considerable  length  of  the  tube  can  be  intro- 
duced, it  is  probable,  I  think,  that  it  remains  coiled  up  in  the  sig- 
moid flexure. 

Another  recommendation  that  has  been  made  is  that  the  flatus 
should  be  removed  by  puncturing  the  descending  colon  with  a  fine 


TYMPANITES.  227 

trocar ;  but,  to  be  effectual,  this  proceeding  demands  some  contrac- 
tile force  in  the  wall  of  the  intestine,  a  force  which  is  generally 
absent.  Other  observers  advise  that  surgical  measures  should  be 
adopted  :  that  a  small  opening  should  be  made  through  the  middle 
line  of  the  abdomen,  and  that  the  distended  intestine,  when  reached, 
should  be  fixed  to  the  abdominal  wall  and  opened.  Although  I 
have  seen  considerable  distention  with  flatus,  I  have  never  felt 
justified  in  recommending  this  proceeding,  since  the  distention  often 
occurs  with  extreme  rapidity  toward  the  close  of  some  chronic  dis- 
eases, as  well  as  in  connection  with  diseases  of  a  septic  type,  and  the 
condition  of  the  patient  then  practically  precludes  the  question  of 
operation.  When,  however,  tympanites  develops  rapidly  in  con- 
nection with  obstruction  in  the  intestine,  not  only  can  there  be  no 
objection  to  the  adoption  of  surgical  measures,  but  they  are  impera- 
tive on  account  of  the  cause  of  the  tympanites  ;  at  the  same  time, 
operation  will  be  undertaken  more  with  the  view  of  relieving  the 
obstruction  than  with  the  object  of  simply  diminishing  discomfort 
from  tympanites.  In  these  cases  the  tympanites  affords  an  addi- 
tional reason  for  avoiding  further  delay,  and  under  such  circum- 
stances the  use  of  the  various  carminatives  given  by  the  mouth,  or 
the  employment  of  rectal  injections  of  turpentine,  can  naturally  be 
of  no  avail. 


CHAPTEE  X. 

BIG^STIO'N— Continued. 

Diarrhoea:  In  Infancy — In  Childhood — In  Adult  Life — Dysentery — Intestinal 
Obstruction,  Acute  and  Chronic. 

Diarrhoea.  The  importance  of  diarrhoea  depends  entirely  upon 
the  attendant  conditions.  Sometimes  it  is  not  to  be  considered  as  a 
disease,  but  only  as  a  symptom  of  but  little  moment,  while  at  other 
times  it  produces  considerable  weakness  and  defies  all  attempts  to 
arrest  it.  The  importance  further  largely  depends  upon  the  age  of 
the  individual.  It  is  responsible  for  a  very  large  proportion  of  the 
deaths  occurring  in  infancy,  more  particularly  during  the  later 
summer  months,  when  numbers  of  infants  brought  to  the  out-patient 
room  of  a  children's  hospital  are  found  to  be  suffering  from  this 
complaint. 

Diarrhoea  may  also  be  a  formidable  trouble  among  those  weak- 
ened by  age,  or  by  pre-existing  disease,  while  it  forms  a  frequent 
prelude  to  the  termination  of  cases  of  general  tuberculosis  and  of 
some  forms  of  chronic  kidney  disease.  This  symptom  is  not,  how- 
ever, always  dependent  upon  anatomical  lesions,  although  in  the 
great  majority  there  is  considerable  enteritis,  and  in  some  of  the 
diseases  in  which  the  symptom  occurs  there  is  also  generally  some 
ulceration,  either  of  the  solitary  glands  or  of  Peyer's  patches,  as  in 
typhoid  fever  and  tuberculosis.  In  many  individuals  chronic  laxity 
of  action  appears  to  depend  upon  nerve  irritation.  Undue  fre- 
quency of  action  of  the  bowels — that  is  to  say,  three  or  four  motions 
daily  of  a  loose  nature — forms  a  common  symptom  in  many  nervous 
young  women  ;  while  acute  diarrhoea  may  also  supervene  with  ner- 
vous excitement,  as  is  seen  so  frequently  in  students  at  times  of 
examination.  In  this  class  of  cases  the  trouble  appears  to  consist 
rather  in  undue  rapidity  of  peristaltic  contractions  than  in  any 
alteration  in  the  vessels  or  in  the  mucous  lining  of  the  intestine ; 
the  loose  character  of  the  motions  depends  upon  the  contents  of  the 
intestine  being  driven  onward  too  rapidly  to  allow  of  the  absorption 
of  fluid.     This  form  of  nervous  diarrhoea  may  not  affect  the  health 


DIARRHOEA.  229 

prejudicially,  although,  when  excessive,  it  leads  to  some  sense  of 
weakness  and  some  impairment  of  nutrition.  It  is  important,  how- 
ever, in  practice,  to  avoid  the  error  of  attributing  to  chronic  ner- 
vous diarrhoea  the  frequent  inefficient  action  of  the  bowels,  which 
forms  a  prominent  symptom  of  malignant  disease  of  the  lower  part 
of  the  intestine,  since,  in  the  early  stages  of  malignant  disease, 
patients  very  frequently  believe  that  they  are  suffering  from  some 
chronic  irritation,  and  may  give  very  misleading  accounts  of  their 
complaint. 

Most  of  the  non-nervous  forms  of  diarrhoea  depend  upon  direct 
irritation  of  the  intestine,  which  may  lead  to  acute  or  chronic  enter- 
itis, or  intestinal  catarrh,  and  the  commonest  cause  of  such  irritation 
is  to  be  found  in  the  diet  of  the  individual,  or  in  some  toxic  sub- 
stance introduced  with  the  food  or  with  the  drinking  water.  As 
the  treatment  of  diarrhoea  depends  largely  upon  the  age  of  the  indi- 
vidual, as  well  as  upon  the  severity  of  the  attack,  it  will  perhaps  be 
most  convenient  to  describe  the  treatment  of  this  symptom  as  it 
occurs  {a)  in  infancy,  (6)  in  childhood,  and  (c)  in  adult  life.  This 
classification  is  adopted  for  the  convenience  of  description  of  the 
measures  best  calculated  to  treat  the  various  conditions,  but  it  must 
be  remembered  that  the  cause  of  the  symptom  may  be  frequently 
traced  to  the  same  group  of  agencies  ;  thus,  although  diarrhoea  in 
infancy  and  in  childhood — for  instance,  diarrhoea  in  infants  of  five 
or  six  months  old  and  diarrhoea  as  it  occurs  in  school-boys — may 
both  result  from  irritation  produced  by  food,  the  treatment  under 
these  two  conditions  of  age  is  necessarily  different. 

(a)  In  infants,  diarrhoea  is  most  likely  to  occur  among  those  who 
are  being  artificially  reared,  instead  of  being  fed  at  the  breast,  and 
it  can  frequently  be  traced  to  the  administration  of  food  which  is 
unsuited  to  the  age  of  the  child,  or  to  lack  of  adequate  care  and 
cleanliness  in  the  preparation  of  food  ;  thus,  it  may  result  from  the 
administration  of  starchy  food  at  too  early  an  age,  or  from  the  irri- 
tation induced  by  overloading  the  alimentary  canal  by  feeding  the 
child  too  frequently,  even  though  the  food  may  be  of  proper  nature. 
It  is,  of  course,  scarcely  necessary  to  say  that  the  symptoms  may  be 
directly  attributable,  among  the  poorer  classes,  to  the  bad  habit  of 
attempting  to  feed  the  infant  on  scraps  of  anything  that  may  be  on 
the  table  for  the  meals  of  the  parents.  Even  when  infants  are  fed 
with  milk  properly  diluted,  diarrhoea  may  often  be  traced  to  lack  of 
care  with  the  feeding-bottle,  especially  when  using  bottles  with  long 


230  DIGESTION. 

tubes,  which  are  somewhat  difficult  to  cleanse  ;  while  even  with  the 
boat  or  slipper-shaped  bottle  I  have  known  serious  diarrhoea  ensue 
from  the  use  o£  milk  which  had  become  somewhat  sour. 

It  is  necessary,  therefore,  in  every  case  of  infantile  diarrhoea  to 
make  careful  inquiry  as  to  the  nature  of  the  food,  and  to  inspect 
closely  the  various  articles  employed  in  its  administration  ;  thus 
possible  errors  may  be  rectified  and  all  trouble  may  cease.  Un- 
happily, it  is  often  found  that,  although  the  cause  of  the  diarrhoea 
is  removed,  the  frequency  of  the  motions  may  persist  from  a  con- 
tinuance of  irritation  in  the  course  of  the  intestine,  and  it  may  be 
necessary  to  order  a  total  change  of  the  food  before  any  improvement 
results.  This  is  more  particularly  the  case  when,  with  hand-fed 
children,  the  milk  has  been  given  in  too  concentrated  a  form,  so 
that  it  has  produced  large  curds,  of  which  some  may  have  been 
rejected  by  vomiting,  while  others  have  been  passed  onward  and 
have  set  up  a  form  of  catarrh.  Under  these  circumstances,  the 
further  administration  of  milk,  however  dilute,  may  still  cause  irri- 
tation, and  it  may  be  necessary  to  withhold  milk  entirely,  and  to 
feed  for  a  day  or  two  with  meat  juice  and  with  barley  water,  until 
the  irritation  has  subsided. 

The  administration  of  milk  may  be  facilitated  by  carefully  steril- 
izing it  with  one  or  other  of  the  numerous  sterilizers  which  have 
been  recently  introduced.  Of  course,  milk  may  be  sterilized  by 
boiling  in  an  enamelled  saucepan  ;  but  this  method  is  sometimes 
inconvenient,  since  milk  froths  up  so  readily  that  a  large  proportion 
may  be  lost,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  the  danger  of  giving 
it  an  unpleasant  taste  of  burning,  which  causes  the  child  to  turn 
against  the  bottle.  With  a  sterilizer  such  as  Arnold's,  Hawksley's, 
Freeman's,  or  Soxhlet's,  the  milk  can  be  raised  to  the  boiling 
point,  and  thus  the  danger  of  introducing  bacteria  or  their  spores  in 
an  active  form  is  averted.  The  milk  can  be  sterilized  at  home  with 
one  or  other  of  these  forms  of  apparatus,  but  in  most  large  towns 
sterilized  milk  can  now  be  obtained,  and  it  is  sometimes  possible,  by 
the  use  of  sterilized  milk,  properly  diluted,  to  diminish  the  frequency 
and  violence  of  diarrhoea. 

When  the  power  of  digesting  milk  is  impaired,  it  may  occasionally 
be  advisable  to  employ  pancreatized  or  peptonized  milk.  The  pep- 
tonizing powder  should  be  added  to  the  milk  previously  to  heating 
it  in  a  sterilizer,  and  the  temperature  should  be  moderately  raised, 
that  is,  to  between  120°  and  140°  F.     This  temperature  should  be 


DIARRHOEA.  231 

maintained  for  ten  to  twenty  minutes,  and  the  mixture  should  then 
be  heated  to  200°  or  to  212°  F.  If  heated  at  once  to  this  higher 
temperature  the  peptonizing  process  is  arrested  too  soon.  It  is, 
however,  necessary  to  avoid  too  prolonged  action  of  the  peptonizing 
powder,  since,  unless  the  action  is  checked  at  the  end  of  from  ten 
to  twenty  minutes,  the  milk  acquires  an  unpleasant,  bitter  taste, 
and  is  then  not  readily  taken  by  tlie  infant.  Even  with  these  pre- 
cautions it  may,  in  severe  cases,  be  necessary  to  discontinue  the  use 
of  milk  entirely,  and  to  substitute  a  mixture  of  meat  juice  with 
barley  water,  or  of  barley  water  with  yolk  of  egg.  Half  an  ounce 
of  yolk  of  egg  may  be  beaten  up  with  10  ounces  of  barley  water, 
with  the  addition  of  a  small  teaspoonful  of  white  sugar ;  sometimes 
a  mixture  of  2  ounces  of  arrowroot  with  2  ounces  of  whey,  sweet- 
ened with  a  teaspoonful  of  white  sugar,  is  more  readily  taken. 
These  substitutes  for  milk  should  be  used  for  only  two  or  three 
days,  when  efforts  to  administer  milk  should  again  be  made. 
When  the  diarrhoea  has  been  associated  with  much  vomiting,  it  is 
always  advisable  to  commence  with  peptonized  milk  in  small  quan- 
tities. 

In  milder  cases  the  more  liberal  employment  of  lime  water  will 
often  prove  beneficial,  a  tablespoonful  or  more  of  lime  water  being 
added  to  every  five  ounces  of  milk.  It  is  often  possible  to  keep  a 
moderate  attack  of  diarrhoea  in  check  by  increasing  the  amount  of 
lime  water  administered,  but  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  lime 
water  is  itself  sometimes  a  cause  of  diarrhcea ;  it  should  therefore 
be  tested  from  time  to  time,  more  particularly  if  it  becomes  unduly 
turbid.  A  mere  trace  of  acidity  may  be  sufficient  to  excite  diar- 
rhoea, which  may  be  difficult  to  control.  When  lime  water  is  inop- 
erative, a  little  liquor  potassse  may  be  substituted,  10  minims  of 
liquor  potassse  being  added  to  5  ounces  of  milk.  Whenever  diar- 
rhoea occurs  it  is  desirable  to  reduce  the  amount  of  milk  given  at 
each  meal,  and,  when  the  symptom  is  severe,  it  may  also  be  advis- 
able to  reduce  the  frequency  of  the  administration  of  food.  Very 
often,  especially  when  the  symptom  is  the  result  of  the  non-diges- 
tion of  milk  and  the  formation  of  large  curds  within  the  stomach 
and  the  intestine,  it  will  be  found  that  benefit  results  from  diluting 
the  milk,  and  giving  a  small  quantity  only  in  the  twenty-four  hours. 
Occasionally,  when  the  pulse  is  feeble  and  rapid,  and  when  the  child 
shows  much  depression  as  the  result  of  the  diarrhoea,  it  is  advisable 
to  employ  stimulants.     There  are  two  methods  for  the  administra- 


232  DIGESTION. 

tion  of  brandy  in  vogue  among  practitioners.  The  one  consists  in 
giving  an  occasional  dose  of  from  10  to  20  drops  of  brandy  with 
a  teaspoonful  of  milk  and  water,  and  the  other  in  using  a  somewhat 
smaller  proportion,  5  drops  or  so,  every  time  that  the  child  is  fed. 
Of  these  two  methods  I  prefer  the  latter,  since  the  small  quantity 
of  brandy  thus  given  is  scarcely  noticed  by  the  child.  When  the 
diarrhoea  has  been  severe,  and  there  is  much  collapse,  I  have  seen 
very  marked  improvement  from  the  employment  of  mistura  spiritus 
vini  gallici  of  the  British  Pharmacopoeia,  in  drachm  doses,  every 
four  hours.  The  composition  of  this  mixture  is  as  follows  :  brandy,  4 
fluidounces  ;  cinnamon  water,  4  fluidounces  ;  refined  sugar,  J  ounce, 
and  the  yolks  of  two  eggs.  This  appears  to  stimulate  the  circula- 
tion, to  strengthen  the  pulse,  and  to  remove  the  troublesome  cold- 
ness of  the  extremities  which  is  so  often  present  in  these  cases. 

It  may  be  advisable  to  mention  here  that,  in  every  case  of  diar- 
rhoea occurring  in  infancy,  the  practitioner  should  satisfy  himself 
that  the  child  is  properly  clad.  Sometimes,  after  all  other  sources 
of  irritation  have  been  sought  for  unavailingly,  there  may  be  reason 
to  believe  that  the  diarrhoea  is  the  result  of  cold,  although  the  exact 
method  by  which  cold  produces  the  diarrhoea  is  not  very  easy  to 
understand.  Still,  it  is  a  fact,  which  must  occur  within  the  expe- 
rience of  most  practitioners,  that  the  application  of  an  additional 
broad  fi.annel  binder  over  the  abdomen  is  followed  not  only  by  an 
increase  of  comfort  and  warmth  in  the  extremities,  but  also  by  a 
diminution  of  diarrhoea.  As  a  matter  of  routine,  it  is  desirable 
that  infants  with  diarrhoea  should  be  kept  in  bed,  lightly  but  warmly 
clad,  and  the  tendency  to  coldness  of  the  extremities  should  be  coun- 
teracted by  the  use  of  hot-water  bottles,  covered  with  flannel,  and 
placed  within  the  bed  at  a  safe  distance  from  the  child. 

It  is  often  recommended  that  opium,  in  some  form,  should  be 
administered  in  severe  cases,  and  elaborate  calculations  have  been 
made  to  show  that  the  amount  of  opium  present  in  the  compound 
kino  powder,  or  in  the  aromatic  chalk  and  opium  powder  of  the 
British  Pharmacopoeia,  is  so  small  that  it  is  possible,  and  even  de- 
sirable, to  employ  this  remedy,  trusting  to  the  kino  and  the  aromatic 
chalk  powder  to  exert  a  beneficial  astringent  action,  which  is  to  be 
aided  by  the  sedative  influence  of  the  opium.  In  compound  kino 
powder  there  is  5  per  cent,  of  opium,  and  in  aromatic  chalk  and 
opium  powder  2J  per  cent,  of  opium.  I  have  rarely  employed 
opium  in  this  way  for  iufants,  nor  do  I  think  that  it  is  a  safe 


DIABBHCEA.  233 

remedy  to  use  when  the  child  is  ah'eady  suffering  from  extreme 
weakness  and  collapse.  These  conditions  appear  to  result  far  more 
from  the  drain  of  liquid  from  the  system  than  from  pain,  and  it  is, 
therefore,  hazardous  to  employ  a  drug  which  entails  further  risk. 

One  curious  condition  frequently  noticed  in  the  diarrhoea  of  in- 
fancy is  the  bright  green  coloration  of  the  motions.  This  appears 
to  depend  upon  the  development  of  micro-organisms  within  the  in- 
testine, the  green  motions  being  commonly  extremely  offensive. 
When  these  green  motions  are  being  passed,  it  is  necessary  to 
employ  some  form  of  antiseptic.  Small  doses  of  mercury  are  fre- 
quently very  beneficial.  The  gray  powder  of  the  Pharmacopoeia 
may  be  mixed  with  milk  sugar,  to  enable  the  small  dose  neces- 
sitated by  the  age  of  the  child  to  be  conveniently  administered. 
I  have  sometimes  employed,  in  lieu  of  this,  a  powder  of  sodium 
bicarbonate  and  rhubarb.  The  sodium  salt  is  useful  in  counteract- 
ing the  undue  acidity  of  the  contents  of  the  intestine,  while  the 
rhubarb  tends  to  remove  the  sources  of  irritation,  and  its  action  is 
followed  by  some  astringent  effect.  In  place  of  the  sodium  bicar- 
bonate, small  doses  of  sodium  salicylate  may  be  given,  combined  with 
carminative  preparations.  The  salicylate  appears  to  be  split  up  in 
the  alimentary  canal,  so  that,  with  this  salt,  we  obtain  the  benefit  of 
an  alkaline  sodium  compound  with  the  antiseptic  action  of  salicylic 
acid.  ^Numerous  other  preparations  have  been  highly  recommended 
in  the  treatment  of  infantile  diarrhoea  for  their  power  of  favoring 
intestinal  antisepsis.  Salol  (phenyl  salicylate)  has  been  strongly 
recommended,  but  it  does  not  appear  to  me  to  be  altogether  devoid 
of  risk  in  the  diarrhoea  of  infancy,  since  it  contains  a  large  propor- 
tion of  carbolic  acid  (40  per  cent.),  which  may  induce  toxic  symp- 
toms. Resorcin,  a  derivative  of  benzene,  or  phenol,  has  also  been 
somewhat  largely  used,  but  in  my  hands  it  has  altogether  failed  to 
relieve  the  urgency  of  the  symptoms,  and  I  have  long  since  ceased 
to  employ  it.  I  have  carefully  tested  this  drug  repeatedly  in  my 
hospital  practice,  and  I  have  invariably  found  that  it  was  necessary 
to  discontinue  its  administration  in  favor  of  other  remedies. 

It  is  to  be  remembered  that  much  restlessness  and  discomfort 
result  from  thirst,  owing  to  the  great  drain  of  liquid  from  the  sys- 
tem. This  may  sometimes  be  relieved  by  the  administration  of 
bismuth  subnitrate  in  sterilized  water,  from  2  to  5  grains  to  the 
drachm.  This  may  be  given  in  doses  of  a  teaspoonful  or  so  every 
hour,  so  long  as  the  restlessness  persists.    At  one  time  it  was  recom- 


234  DIGESTION. 

mended  that  the  loss  of  liquid  should  be  met  by  the  transfusion  of 
a  saliue  solution.  Although  theoretically  attractive,  this  treatment 
has  not,  in  my  practice,  appeared  to  give  very  satisfactory  results. 

(6)  In  childhood  diarrhoea  most  commonly  results  from  injudi- 
cious experimentation  on  the  part  of  the  child — that  is,  it  is  nearly 
always  caused  by  eating  some  highly  indigestible  or  acid  substance  : 
unripe  fruit,  imperfectly  masticated,  is  perhaps  the  commonest  cause 
among  country  children ;  while  in  large  towns,  among  the  poorer 
classes,  although  diarrhoea  may  ensue  from  the  same  cause,  it  also 
often  follows  the  ingestion  of  over-ripe  fruit,  which  is  already  under- 
going fermentative  changes.  The  symptom  is  no  doubt  the  result 
of  irritation  of  the  intestine,  not  only  by  vegetable  acids,  but  also 
by  irregular,  hard,  indigestible  masses.  Apart  from  this,  however, 
diarrhoea  may  occur  in  childhood  in  epidemic  form,  more  particu- 
larly during  the  summer  months,  and  it  may  then  be  due  to  irrita- 
tion induced  by  water  infected  with  some  specific  organism.  It  i^ 
certain  that,  during  the  summer  months,  epidemic  diarrhoea  is  more 
likely  to  occur  after  the  continuance  of  hot,  dry  weather  than  Avhen 
the  heat  is  alternated  with  cooling  winds  and  rain.  Diarrhoea  may 
also,  in  childhood,  form  the  premonitory  symptom  of  more  serious 
specific  disorders,  such  as  typhoid  fever,  or  it  may  occur,  as  already 
indicated,  in  connection  with  general  tuberculosis,  more  particularly 
with  tuberculosis  affecting  the  mesenteric  glands. 

Since  diarrhoea  due  to  irritation  is  likely  to  be  increased  by  ex- 
posure to  cold,  it  will  generally  be  found  advisable  to  insist  on  the 
child  remaining  in  bed,  even  though  the  symptoms  may  not  be  very 
severe  ;  for  apart  from  the  benefit  resulting  from  rest  and  warmth, 
there  is  also  less  likelihood  of  the  child  obtaining  access  to  any  fresh 
source  of  irritation  when  its  movements  are  thus  limited. 

When  a  sharp  attack  of  diarrhoea  in  a  child  can  be  distinctly  traced 
to  unripe  fruit  or  other  form  of  irritant,  the  symptom  is  best  treated 
by  favoring  the  eliminative  action  of  the  bowel  by  castor  oil,  since  the 
use  of  astringents  or  sedatives  can  only  be  harmful  so  long  as  any  irri- 
tating particles  remain  in  the  course  of  the  intestine.  It  is  desirable, 
therefore,  to  increase  the  rapidity  of  peristaltic  contractions  by  using 
half-drachm  or  drachm  doses  of  castor  oil,  unless  the  patient  only 
comes  under  observation  at  a  sufficient  length  of  time  after  the 
onset  of  the  attack,  or  after  frequent  diarrhoea  renders  it  probable 
that  the  source  of  irritation  has  already  been  eliminated.  Speaking 
generally,  it  is,  however,  so  uncertain  whether  this  desirable  result 


DIABBHCEA.  235 

has  been  attained,  that  it  is  almost  invariably  well  to  commence  the 
treatment  of  irritative  diarrhoea  in  childhood  with  the  administra- 
tion of  castor  oil,  or  of  some  other  mild  but  brisk  purgative.  The 
rapid  evacuation  produced  as  a  rule  by  castor  oil  is  ordinarily  fol- 
lowed by  an  arrest  of  action  ;  but,  to  insure  a  quiescent  condition  of 
the  intestine,  preparations  of  rhubarb  are  often  used  in  place  of 
castor  oil.  the  rheotannic  acid  producing  an  astringent  effect  upon 
the  vessels  of  the  intestine.  The  compound  rhubarb  powder  of  the 
PharmaGoposia  will  often  give  satisfactory  results,  but  its  subse- 
quent astringent  effect  should  be  assisted  by  the  use  of  aromatic 
chalk  preparations,  which  will  relieve  the  pain  so  often  left  after 
acute  diarrhoea.  Most  of  the  pain  is  due  to  the  distention  of  the 
lax  walls  of  the  intestine  with  flatus,  and  the  rumbling  movements 
of  this  flatus,  with  the  consequent  spasm  of  different  portions  of  the 
small  intestine,  will  often  produce  almost  more  discomfort  and  com- 
plaint than  the  original  attack  of  diarrhoea. 

During  the  early  part  of  the  treatment  it  is  advisable  that  the 
diet  should  be  as  simple  and  unirritating  as  possible.  Food  should 
be  given  in  the  liquid  form,  and  should  be  of  such  a  nature  that  it 
is  readily  digested  with  the  minimum  of  insoluble  residue.  Milk, 
which  may  with  benefit  be  diluted,  is  generally  readily  taken,  and 
its  employment  may  be  facilitated  by  its  administration  with  arrow- 
root or  with  boiled  bread.  In  severe  cases  the  milk  should  be  given 
cold,  since  the  introduction  of  a  warm  fluid  into  the  stomach  is  apt 
to  be  followed  by  increase  of  peristalsis.  Astringents  are  not  often 
required  when  diarrhoea  is  due  to  simple  irritation,  but  if  it  persists 
after  the  substitution  of  liquid  for  solid  food,  and  after  the  castor 
oil  or  rhubarb  powder  has  acted  freely,  it  may  be  desirable  to  em- 
ploy some  intestinal  sedative,  or  even  an  intestinal  sedative  combined 
with  an  astringent.  Bismuth  preparations  are  often  extremely  bene- 
ficial in  the  later  treatment  of  the  diarrhoea  of  childhood,  since  the 
sedative  action  of  bismuth  compounds  is  not  limited  to  the  effect 
upon  the  stomach.  In  the  summer  diarrhoea  of  children,  Solis- 
Cohen  gives — 

Uc. — Bismuthi  salicylatis        ......  gr.  ij. 

Benzonaphthol        .         .         .         .         .         .         .  gr.  ij. 

Pulveris  ipecacuanha  et  opii  .         .         .         .         •  gi'-  ss. 
Ft.  pulv.     For  a  child  of  two  years. 

In  place  of  bismuth,  the  chalk  mixture  of  the  Pharmacopoeia 
may  be   given   in  doses  of    half   an  ounce   or   less,  according  to 


236  DIGESTION. 

the  age  of  the  child,  and  the  efficacy  of  this  mixture  is  often  in- 
creased by  tlie  administration  of  an  equal  amount  of  the  decoction 
of  logwood,  or  by  the  addition  of  appropriate  quantities  of  tincture 
of  catechu  or  tincture  of  krameria.  The  compound  powder  of 
catechu  of  the  British  Pharmacopoeia,  which  contains  kino,  krameria, 
cinnamon,  and  nutmeg,  is  often  used  when  the  diarrhoea  proves  rebel- 
lious, but  this  powder  is  perhaps  more  serviceable  in  those  forms  of 
diarrhoea  due  to  more  chronic  changes  in  the  walls  of  the  intestine. 

When  there  is  much  complaint  of  pain,  with  much  restlessness, 
it  is  sometimes  advisable  to  use  moderate  quantities  of  opium  ;  but 
it  must  be  remembered  that,  if  employed  at  all  for  children,  this 
drug  is  to  be  used  in  relatively  small  proportions.  If  needed,  there 
is  no  objection  to  the  use  of  compound  kino  powder,  which  contains 
5  per  cent,  of  opium  ;  while  the  aromatic  powder  of  chalk  and  opium, 
although  the  proportion  of  opium  is  only  one-half  that  contained  in 
the  compound  kino  powder,  will  sometimes  give  even  greater  comfort, 
on  account  of  the  large  proportion  of  aromatic  substances  present. 

Since  the  pain  connected  with  attacks  of  diarrhoea  is  so  frequently 
the  result  of  spasmodic  contraction  of  some  portion  of  the  intestine, 
it  may  often  be  relieved  by  warm  applications  over  the  surface  of 
the  abdomen,  and  indeed  this  treatment  may  sometimes  render  the 
use  of  opium  unnecessary.  Hot  fomentations  may  be  thus  used,  or 
spongiopiline,  moistened  with  hot  water,  may  be  placed  over  the 
abdomen,  and  the  relief  is  sometimes  greatly  increased  by  sprinkling 
the  flannel  or  spongiopiline  with  laudanum,  or  with  oil  of  turpen- 
tine, oil  of  cajuput,  or  some  other  volatile  oil,  and  in  severe  cases 
there  is  no  objection  to  employing  these  measures  at  the  same  time 
that  opium  is  being  administered  internally.  The  treatment  of  forms 
of  diarrhoea  which  occur  in  children  as  the  result  of  definite  diseases 
does  not  differ  materially  from  the  treatment  of  similar  conditions 
occurring  in  adults,  although  the  doses  of  the  various  remedies  must 
necessarily  be  adapted  to  the  age  of  the  child. 

(c)  Diarrhoea,  as  it  occurs  in  adults,  may  also  be  due  to  irritation, 
though  the  causes  of  irritation  are  perhaps  rather  more  various  than 
in  children ;  thus,  during  the  summer  months,  beer  that  is  a  little 
sour,  or  milk  which  has  been  kept  too  long,  may  start  a  violent 
attack  of  diarrhoea,  which  may  seem  out  of  all  proportion  to  the 
small  source  of  irritation.  Diarrhoea  occurring  under  these  condi- 
tions is  in  all  probability  due  to  microbic  action,  which  has  produced 
fermentative  changes  of  an  irritant  character,  and  the  irritation  in 


DIABRHCEA.  237 

the  wall  of  tlie  intestine,  when  once  started,  may  continue  long  after 
the  elimination  of  the  exciting  cause.  Such  forms  of  irritative  diar- 
rhoea in  adults  are  to  be  treated  on  the  same  principles  as  in  child- 
hood, but  opiates  may  generally  be  employed  early  with  the  view  of 
relieving  pain,  and  also  of  checking  the  rapidity  of  peristaltic  con- 
tractions. In  adults  this  form  of  diarrhoea  will  also  more  frequently 
call  for  the  administration  of  stimulants  to  counteract  the  depression 
of  the  circulation  ;  brandy  may  be  given  with  milk  throughout  the 
day,  or  occasionally  port  wine  is  preferred,  since  it  possesses  not 
only  stimulant  but  also  astringent  properties. 

The  need  of  warmth  and  of  rest  is  determined  by  the  severity  of 
the  attack.  In  mild  cases,  patients  commonly  continue  their  ordi- 
nary vocations ;  but  with  a  severe  attack,  more  particularly  when 
it  occurs  during  the  summer  months,  and  especially  if  there  is  an 
epidemic  of  diarrhoea,  it  will  be  desirable  to  keep  the  patient  in 
bed  and  to  observe  the  same  precautions  that  are  adopted  in  infancy, 
since  during  epidemics  of  diarrhoea  exertion  and  exposure  may 
speedily  be  followed  by  extreme  collapse.  During  times  of  epi- 
demic, especially  if  many  cases  of  typhoid  have  occurred  in  the 
neighborhood,  it  is  well  to  treat  every  case  on  the  supposition  that 
it  may  eventually  prove  to  be  typhoid — that  is,  the  diet  should 
consist  entirely  of  liquids,  and  unless  the  diarrhoea  is  profuse  and 
exhausting,  it  is  better  not  to  employ  any  active  remedies  to  check 
this  symptom.  To  some  extent  the  temperature-chart  will  assist  in 
the  diagnosis,  but  to  be  of  any  marked  service  this  chart  must  be 
kept  over  a  succession  of  days,  since  even  in  irritative  diarrhoea 
there  may  be  a  rise  to  100°,  101°,  or  even  higher;  while,  at  the 
commencement  of  typhoid  fever,  the  temperature  in  exceptional 
cases  may  remain  but  little  above  ^the  normal,  so  long  as  the  diar- 
rhoea is  very  profuse.  When  it  is  certain  that  the  attack  is  one  of 
simple  irritative  diarrhoea,  and  the  source  of  irritation  has  been 
removed,  various  astringents  may  be  employed  with  a  free  hand. 
Some  practitioners  prefer  to  use  mineral  acids,  while  others  prefer 
one  or  other  of  the  drugs  rich  in  tannic  acid,  or  in  modified  forms 
of  tannic  acid.  The  following  prescriptions  are  used  at  some  of  the 
London  hospitals : 

R. — Acidi  gallici  .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .  gr.  x. 

Acidi  sulphuric!  diluti  ......  Tllxx. 

Tincturse  opii  camphoratse      .....  tTLxx. 

Aquae     .         .         .         .         .         .         .       q.  s.  ad  ^j. 


.     gr.  X. 

q.  s.  ad     §j. 


q.  s.  ad     §j. 


238  DIGESTION. 

K .  — Acidi  gallici  . 

Acidi  sulphurici  diluti 
Tincturse  opii 

Aquae     . 

U. — Glyceriti  acidi  gallici 
Acidi  sulphurici  diluti 
Tincturse  opii 
Aquae     . 

Preparations  of  cinchona  may  be  employed  to  exert  an  astringent 
effect,  and  also  to  increase  appetite ;  but  more  commonly  logwood, 
catechu,  and  kino  are  the  drugs  which  are  given,  and  these  may  be 
employed  with  aromatic  chalk  powder,  or  the  chalk  mixture  of  the 
Pharmacopoeia.     The  following  is  often  employed  : 

H. — Villi  ipecacuanhae  .         ......     TTLxx. 

Tincturse  catechu    .......     TTt^x. 

Tincturce  kramerise  .         .         .         .         .         •     5J- 

Goto  bark  has  been  highly  praised  for  diarrhoea,  but  it  is  not  yet 
official.  This  bark  is  rich  in  resinous  principles,  and  the  tincture 
therefore  requires  to  be  administered  with  mucilage.  The  tincture 
may  be  used  in  doses  of  5  to  10  minims,  administered  every  two 
hours  so  long  as  the  diarrhoea  persists. 

A  form  of  diarrhoea  which  requires  some  special  treatment  is  that 
which  follows  upon  continuous  indulgence  in  alcohol.  To  these 
cases  the  term  "  diarrhoea  "  is  perhaps  scarcely  applicable,  although 
they  are  marked  by  the  passage  of  three  or  four  loose,  unformed 
motions  in  the  twenty-four  hours.  They  may  be  regarded  as  prima- 
rily due  to  irritation,  but  the  mere  abstinence  from  alcohol  is  com- 
monly insufficient  to  effect  a  cure.  Frequently  the  irritation  of  the 
intestine  is  associated  with  similar  gastric  disturbance,  producing 
symptoms  of  chronic  gastritis  ;  but  sometimes  these  symptoms,  or  at 
least  the  more  urgent  of  them,  will  pass  off,  while  the  enteric  symptoms 
may  persist.  These  cases  are  to  be  treated  on  the  principles  already 
detailed  in  connection  with  chronic  gastritis.  They  call  for  the  admin- 
istration of  preparations  of  bismuth  and  of  other  sedatives  rather 
than  for  the  employment  of  more  active  astringents.  Commonly 
the  lax  condition  of  the  bowel  is  associated  with  much  accumula- 
tion of  flatus,  and  this  may  cause  considerable  discomfort  and  indi- 
cates the  need  of  carminatives.  Occasionally,  when  an  attack  of 
diarrhoea  ensues  after  a  prolonged  bout  of  drinking,  the  treatment 
may  be  commenced  with  the  administration  of  a  saline  purgative, 


DIABBHCEA.  239 

which  may  be  repeated  for  one  or  two  days ;  it  is  then  well  to  resort 
to  the  employment  of  bismuth  suboarbonate  or  subnitrate,  and  to 
give  either  of  these  drugs  in  conjunction  with  diluted  hydrocyanic 
acid.  ISTux  vomica  is  also  frequently  of  great  service  in  these  cases, 
since  it  increases  the  appetite  and  digestive  powers,  but  it  is  not  to 
be  trusted  alone,  the  irritation  of  the  intestine  demanding  the  use 
of  sedative  measures.  When  dealing  with  mild  cases  of  intestinal 
catarrh  due  to  alcoholism  and  devoid  of  pain,  opiates  are  not  gen- 
erally required ;  but  when  the  symptoms  are  severe,  and  persist  in 
spite  of  the  administration  of  preparations  of  bismuth  and  of  tonic 
remedies,  the  camphorated  tincture  of  opium  is  often  found  to  be 
extremely  serviceable. 

Intestinal  catarrh,  as  the  result  of  alcoholism,  may  not  always 
lead  to  any  complaint  on  the  part  of  the  patient ;  indeed,  it  may  be 
asserted  that  the  bowels  are  acting  regularly,  even  though  further 
inquiry  shows  that  the  supposed  regularity  consists  in  frequent  ex- 
cessive action.  Such  irregularity  of  action  in  these  cases  is  often 
regarded  by  the  patient  as  more  satisfactory  than  constipation.  In 
dealing  with  alcoholic  cases,  however,  it  is  well  to  remember  that 
the  cause  of  the  symptoms  may  depend  upon  changes  outside  the 
intestine,  and  that  excessive  frequency  of  action  may  arise  in  conse- 
quence of  hepatic  engorgement,  which  may  itself  be  due  to  alcoholism. 

Hepatic  engorgement  from  other  causes  may,  however,  be  fol- 
lowed by  diarrhoea.  Even  when  the  engorgement  is  due  to  tempo- 
rary alterations,  as  with  the  acute  hepatitis  induced  by  cold,  there 
may  be  some  increased  frequency  of  action ;  this  is  in  part  due  to 
interference  with  the  portal  circulation,  and  in  part  no  doubt  to 
diminished  supply  of  bile.  When  the  body  has  been  chilled  after 
having  been  previously  heated,  as,  for  example,  with  bathing  on  a 
hot  day  after  exertion,  the  motions  are  very  apt  to  become  loose  and 
devoid  of  bile-coloring  matter,  even  though  the  interference  with 
the  functions  of  the  liver  may  be  insufficient  to  produce  any  other 
obvious  indications.  When  due  to  chill,  this  form  of  diarrhcea 
commonly  subsides  in  a  few  days  without  requiring  any  special 
treatment ;  but  the  recovery  may  be  assisted  by  the  avoidance  of 
fresh  exposure,  by  early  hours,  and  by  a  saline  purgative.  When, 
however,  the  obstruction  to  the  portal  circulation  is  induced  by 
more  chronic  causes,  the  symptom  may  be  more  persistent  and  may 
call  for  the  occasional  administration  of  mercurial  purgatives,  such 
as  small  doses  of  gray  powder,  or  of  calomel. 


240  DIGESTION. 

Sometimes  this  symptom  occurs  in  connection  with  cirrhosis, 
but,  as  a  rule,  it  is  more  likely  to  arise  with  diseases  which  indi- 
rectly obstruct  the  portal  system ;  thus,  it  is  not  uncommon  for 
it  to  be  associated  with  chronic  pulmonary  complaints,  or  with 
chronic  forms  of  heart  disease,  in  which  the  compensation  is  com- 
mencing to  fail.  When  diarrhoea  occurs  under  such  circumstances, 
it  is  rarely  sujfficiently  profuse  to  call  for  much  active  treatment. 
Measures  must  be  adopted  for  removing  the  cause,  and  these  will 
commonly  include  the  administration  of  drugs  which,  like  digitalis 
or  strophanthus,  increase  the  contractile  power  of  the  ventricle,  and 
thus  diminish  the  venous  engorgement.  Sometimes,  however,  it 
may  be  necessary  to  check  undue  frequency  of  action  by  the  em- 
ployment of  enemata  contaiuing  opium,  and  if  there  is  much  weak- 
ness induced  by  excessive  purgation,  it  will  be  advisable  to  give 
astringent  preparations  by  the  mouth,  together  with  stimulants. 
Should  the  symptom  arise  while  the  patient  with  heart  disease  is 
already  under  treatment  for  this  complaint,  it  is  always  desirable  to 
reduce  the  amount  of  digitalis  administered,  and  even  to  substitute 
strophanthus  for  digitalis,  since  diarrhoea  may,  in  some  constitu- 
tions, result  from  the  employment  of  the  latter  remedy.  I  have 
frequently  seen  the  discontinuance  of  digitalis  followed  by  a  ces- 
sation of  diarrhoea,  even  without  the  use  of  any  other  remedies. 

Undue  frequency  of  action,  the  consequence  of  malignant  disease 
of  some  portion  of  the  intestine,  has  already  been  mentioned.  In 
these  cases  the  motions  are  passed  with  difficulty  and  often  with 
pain,  and  their  frequency  is  an  indication  of  obstruction  rather  than 
of  irritation ;  hence,  the  mere  frequency  is  a  fallacious  indication, 
and  calls  for  the  administration  of  laxatives  prior  to  the  probable 
adoption  of  surgical  measures. 

The  forms  of  diarrhoea  associated  with  lardaceous  disease,  with 
tuberculosis,  with  dysenteric  conditions,  and  with  typhoid  fever, 
will  be  more  appropriately  considered  under  those  separate  head- 
ings, though  it  may  be  here  mdicated  that  both  the  lardaceous 
disease  and  in  tuberculosis,  benefit  will  sometimes  result  from  the 
employment  of  small  doses  of  alum,  even  when  other  astringents 
appear  to  give  but  little  relief. 

Severe  attacks  of  diarrhoea  occasionally  ensue  after  prolonged 
constipation.  The  hardened  masses  of  feces,  which  have  been 
retained  within  the  bowel,  serve  as  irritants  which  cause  the  evacu- 
ation of  small  scybalous  masses  together  with  much  mucus.     An 


DIABBHCEA.  241 

inspection  of  tiie  motions  will  suffice  to  indicate  bhe  appropriate  treat- 
ment under  such  conditions,  though  the  nature  of  the  trouble  may 
be  suspected  when  complaint  is  made  of  dull  pain  which^is  referred 
to  one  portion  of  the  abdominal  wall,  and  is  occasionally  greatly 
increased  whenever  any  hard  masses  of  feces  pass  over  the  inflamed 
surface.  The  risk  of  constant  repetition  of  irritation  may  usually  be 
obviated  by  alterations  in  the  diet  which  will  reduce  the  bulk  and 
the  firmness  of  the  intestinal  contents.  This  may  be  effected  by 
recommending  a  diet  consisting  largely  of  milk,  which  may  be  thick- 
ened with  arrowroot,  tapioca,  or  flour  ;  and  if  this  seems  insufficient, 
simple  custard  puddings  may  be  given,  or  occasionally  eggs  beaten 
up  with  milk  may  be  taken.  All  forms  of  food  that  may  induce 
irritation  should  be  avoided.  The  use  of  figs,  or  of  other  fruit  con- 
taining hard  insoluble  material,  is  distinctly  contraindicated  so  long 
as  any  tenderness  persists.  The  further  treatment  consists  in  the 
use  of  laxatives  and  of  enemata,  though  in  severe  cases  it  may  be 
necessary  to  remove  the  scybalous  masses  from  the  lower  portion  of 
the  bowel  by  mechanical  agencies.  When  it  appears  probable  that 
prolonged  constipation  is  the  cause  of  the  diarrhoea,  it  will  be  advis- 
able to  treat  the  case  on  the  principles  already  laid  down  for  the 
treatment  of  diarrhoea  due  to  irritation  —that  is,  purgatives,  such  as 
castor  oil  or  senna,  may  first  be  used  to  clear  the  alimentary  canal 
of  any  source  of  irritation,  and  after  these  have  acted  efficiently, 
astringents  may  be  administered  if  diarrhoea  persists.  Frequently, 
however,  after  the  alimentary  canal  has  been  thus  emptied,  small 
doses  of  belladonna  and  nux  vomica,  constantly  repeated,  will  serve 
to  re-establish  the  normal  regularity  of  contraction,  and  will  thus 
counteract  the  tendency  to  constipation  and  remove  the  liability  to 
diarrhoea  from  this  cause. 

Several  new  remedies  have  been  recently  introduced  with  the 
view  of  exerting  local  action  upon  the  intestine,  while  they  pass 
through  the  stomach  unchanged.  These  remedies  are  commonly 
substances  which  are  insoluble  in  acid,  but  soluble  in  alkaline  fluids. 
Among  them  may  be  mentioned  preparations  derived  from  tannin, 
such  as  tannoform,  a  condensation  product  of  nut  gall,  tannin,  and 
formaldehyde.  Tannoform  is  stated  to  have  been  used  with  satis- 
factory results  as  an  intestinal  antiseptic  and  as  an  astringent  in 
cases  of  infantile  diarrhoea.  Tannalbin  is  the  albuminate  of  tannin, 
which  contains  50  per  cent,  of  tannic  acid.  This  drug  is  tasteless, 
and  it  has  been  employed  in  doses  of  from  5  to  15  grains,  four  times 

16 


242  DIGESTION. 

a  day  in  water  or  in  milk,  in  cases  of  subacute  or  chronic  intestinal 
catarrh.  Tannigen,  a  compound  of  tannin  and  diacetyl,  is  stated  to 
pass  through  the  stomach  unchanged  and  to  decompose  in  the  duo- 
denum, where  it  liberates  tannin  in  the  nascent  condition.  Mon- 
corvo^  has  found  that  its  action  is  generally  prompt,  certain,  and 
effectual,  both  in  acute  and  chronic  diarrhoea.  He  also  states  that 
the  activity  is  no  way  reduced  when  it  is  associated  with  antiseptics, 
such  as  salol,  or  bismuth  salicylate,  and  he  therefore  recommends 
that  it  should  be  used  in  conjunction  with  these  when  there  are 
indications  of  active  fermentative  processes  in  the  large  intestine. 
Tannigen  can  also  be  given  in  milk,  in  doses  of  from  2  to  16  grains, 
three  or  four  times  a  day. 

Dysentery.  In  the  foregoing  section,  the  laxity  of  the  action  of 
the  bowels  is  not  necessarily  attributable  to  changes  in  any  special 
part  of  the  intestine.  The  symptom  of  diarrhoea  may  be  the  result 
of  changes  in  the  upper  part  of  the  small  intestine,  especially  when 
it  is  due  to  irritation  ;  sometimes,  on  the  other  hand,  when  due  to 
prolonged  constipation  and  the  irritation  produced  by  a  mass  of 
impacted  feces,  it  may  be  the  result  of  inflammatory  changes  in  the 
large  intestine,  more  particularly  in  the  csecum.  It  remains  in  the 
present  section  to  consider  a  form  of  diarrhoea  in  which  the  anatom- 
ical changes  are  primarily,  if  not  entirely,  located  in  the  large  intes- 
tine. These  changes  are  sometimes  those  of  simple  inflammation, 
but  in  more  advanced  cases  the  mucous  membrane  may  be  greatly 
denuded,  and  in  the  most  severe  type  deep  ulcerations  may  be  formed 
in  the  course  of  the  large  intestine. 

The  treatment  to  some  extent  depends  upon  the  stage  of  the  dis- 
ease. As  seen  in  this  country,  dysentery  is  generally  chronic  ;  but 
it  occurs  in  an  acute  form,  more  particularly  in  tropical  countries 
and  in  malarial  districts,  and  the  treatment  of  the  acute  malady  is 
necessarily  more  energetic  than  that  of  the  chronic.  The  acute  form 
may  arise  under  conditions  of  overcrowding,  especially  when  the 
sanitary  arrangements  are  bad  and  individuals  are  subjected  to  much 
muscular  exertion  with  a  deficiency  of  food ;  thus,  for  example,  the 
acute  form  of  dysentery  frequently  occurs  in  armies  in  the  field, 
especially  if  exposed  to  rain  and  to  rapid  alterations  of  tempera- 
ture. Under  these  conditions  severe  diarrhoea  may  commence,  and 
violent  symptoms  may  arise  as  the  disease  spreads.    In  an  epidemic 

1  Bull,  de  I'Acad.  de  Med.,  December  3,  1895. 


DYSENTERY.  243 

form  it  has  frequently,  also,  been  attributed  to  the  use  of  impure 
water,  especially  when  contaminated  with  sewage.  In  all  probability, 
however,  the  worst  forms  of  dysentery  depend  upon  the  action  of 
septic  organisms  in  addition  to  that  of  a  specific  virus. 

In  the  acute  stage,  the  patient  should  be  kept  in  bed,  and  should 
be  encouraged  to  lie  upon  his  back  and  to  avoid  all  unnecessary 
movements.      If   the  conditions   permit,   he  should  not  even  be 
allowed  to  get  up  to  attend  to  the  calls  of  nature,  since  exposure  to 
cold  and  all  movements  are  likely  to  be  followed  by  an  increased 
severity  of  the  symptoms.     The  abdominal  pain  may  be  relieved, 
to  some  extent,  by  the  application  of  hot  fomentations,  poultices,  or 
mustard  plasters,  though  frequently  it  will  be  necessary  to  assist  the 
operation  of  any  of  these  measures  by  employing  small  doses  of 
opium,  or  of  morphine.     It  is  well  to  remember  that  these  remedies 
are  to  be  used  only  for  the  temporary  relief  of  pain,  and  that  the 
dose  must  not  be  pushed  with  any  hope  of  checking  the  frequency 
of  action  of  the  bowel ;  indeed,  many  practitioners  prefer  to  treat 
cases  of  acute  dysentery  without  employing  opium.     Since  the  pain 
of  dysentery  is  chiefly  of  the  nature  of  tenesmus,  the  local  applica- 
tion of  opium  will  be  more  beneficial  and  less  harmful  than  its 
administration  by  the  mouth.     SujDpositories  of  morphine  or  of  ace- 
tate of  lead  and  opium  may  be  employed  ;  but  the  latter  are  fre- 
quently somewhat  irritating,  and  it  is  better  either  to  make  up  a 
suppository  of  opium  and  oil  of  theobroma  (1  grain  of  opium  in 
each),  or  to  administer  small  enemata  of  opium,  as,  for  example,  half 
a  fluidrachm  of  tincture  of  opium  with  2  fluidounces  of  mucilage  of 
starch.     A  greater  bulk  of  liquid  would  be  likely  to  be  rejected,, 
owing  to  the  extreme  sensitiveness  of  the  rectum  ;  while,  if  the  laud- 
anum is  used  in  more  concentrated  form,  the  spirit  present  would 
be  apt  to  promote  an  action  of  the  bowel.     It  is  better  therefore  to- 
use  the  mixture  in  the  above-named  proportions,  or  even  to  employ 
repeatedly  an  enema  of  half  the  amount  until  the  tenesmus  is  re~ 
lieved.    It  is  often  found,  however,  that  after  the  passage  of  a  motion 
the  tenesmus  is  considerably  less  ;  hence,  it  is  advisable  not  to  be  too 
precipitate  in  employing  opiates,  nor  to  be  misled  by  the  symptoms 
of  relief,  which  may  not  necessarily  be  due  to  the  drugs  employed. 
If  it  is  decided  to  administer  an  enema,  or  a  suppository,  the  tender- 
ness of  the  anus  and  of  the  rectum  should  be  borne  iii  mind,  and  the 
introduction  of  the  suppository  or  of  the  rectal  tube,  should  be  made 
with  the  utmost  gentleness.     Although  the  employment  of  opium  by 


244  DIGESTION. 

the  mouth  may  be  followed  by  some  immediate  relief  of  pain,  this  is 
frequently  attained  at  the  expense  of  very  great  subsequent  discom- 
fort, since  the  temporary  inaction  of  the  large  intestine,  due  to  the 
opium,  will  in  all  probability  be  followed  later  by  a  great  increase 
of  tenesmus. 

Most  authorities  are  agreed  upon  the  benefits  of  ipecacuanha  in 
the  treatment  of  dysentery,  though  the  exact  method  of  its  employ- 
ment has  given  rise  to  much  divergence  of  opinion.  It  may  be 
stated,  however,  that  there  is  a  consensus  of  agreement  against  the 
use  of  astringents  to  arrest  the  frequency  of  diarrhoea.  The  disease 
is  infectious,  contagious,  and  due  to  the  presence  of  a  specific  germ, 
and  it  is  therefore  unscientific  to  attempt  to  undermine  the  action  of 
this  germ  by  ordinary  astringent  measures.  It  is  somewhat  diffi- 
cult, however,  to  afford  an  explanation  of  the  mode  of  action  of  ipe- 
cacuanha, although  there  is  very  little  doubt  about  its  efficacy. 
Some  authors  speak  of  it  as  a  specific  cholagogue  ;  possibly  the  drug 
may  be  beneficial  through  its  influence  upon  the  secretion  of  the 
liver,  which  is  rendered  more  fluid  and  perhaps  more  abundant,  and 
in  this  connection  it  is  worth  remembering  that  in  some  cases  of 
dysentery  hepatic  symptoms  are  present,  with  frequent  bilious  vomit- 
ing. It  is  commonly  recommended  that  doses  of  from  20  to  30 
grains  or  more  of  the  powdered  root  should  be  given  twice  a  day, 
and  since  this  dose  is  liable  to  promote  vomiting,  its  administration 
is  frequently  preceded  by  a  small  dose  of  opium,  or  by  30  grains  of 
potassium  bromide  ;  and  further,  with  the  view  of  diminishing  the 
risk  of  vomiting,  or  of  allaying  vomiting  if  this  has  already  occurred, 
small  pieces  of  ice  may  be  sucked  frequently,  both  before  and  after 
the  use  of  ipecacuanha.  Moreover,  it  is  desirable  to  keep  the  patient 
without  food  for  some  hours,  or  only  to  administer  small  quantities 
of  nourishment  in  a  liquid  form.  A  little  milk,  or  an  egg  beaten 
up  with  milk,  will  sometimes  serve  to  tide  over  difficulties  during 
the  commencement  of  the  treatment  with  ipecacuanha.  The  large 
dose  above  mentioned  may  be  given  in  wafer  paper,  or  in  cachets, 
or  it  may  be  made  up  into  a  mass  with  a  little  syrup.  It  has  been 
suggested  that  this  drug  should  be  given  in  the  form  of  pills  ;  but 
these  would  require  to  be  unduly  bulky  to  admit  so  large  a  dose,  or 
else  it  would  be  necessary  to  give  an  inconvenient  number,  and, 
since  many  patients  find  it  almost  impossible  to  swallow  a  pill  with- 
out a  draught  of  water,  the  amount  of  fluid  thus  taken  might  provoke 
vomiting.     Brunton  recommends  that  a  dose  of  laudanum  should 


DYSENTERY.  245 

be  given  half  an  hour  before  the  administration  of  ipecacuanha,  and 
that  after  the  latter  has  been  taken  the  patient  should  be  kept  in 
the  recumbent  posture,  with  his  head  low. 

When  vomiting  forms  a  prominent  symptom  from  the  commence- 
ment of  the  attack,  the  administration  of  these  massive  doses  of 
ipecacuanha  is  generally  inadvisable.  Sometimes  it  has  been  re- 
commended that  efforts  should  be  primarily  directed  to  arrest  the 
vomiting,  and  minim  doses  of  tincture  of  iodine  have  been  given 
every  half -hour  with  this  object.  If,  however,  there  is  much  rise  of 
temperature,  ^-minim  doses  of  tincture  of  aconite  have  been  used, 
repeated  every  half -hour  until  the  temperature  falls  ;  but  even  under 
such  circumstances  it  is  generally  considered  to  be  advisable  to  give 
ipecacuanha  also  in  small  doses  frequently.  According  to  the  ur- 
gency of  the  symptoms,  from  5  to  10  grains  of  ipecacuanha  may  be 
administered  every  four  or  every  six  hours,  and  if  given  with  seda- 
tive remedies  this  dose  can  frequently  be  tolerated  when  larger  doses 
are  rejected.  The  ipecacuanha  may  be  made  up  into  a  mixture  with 
from  10  to  15  minims  of  laudanum  and  10  to  15  grains  of  bismuth 
subcarbonate  and  the  same  amount  of  sodium  bicarbonate. 

The  following  prescription  has  been  used  with  marked  success  in 
the  Mandoli  Regimental  Hospital  at  Bhurtpore  in  cases  of  acute 
dysentery  : 


R. — QuiniriEe  sulphatis  . 

Pulveris  ipecacuanhse 

Ammonii  chloridi  . 

Tincturse  opii 

Aquae     . 
To  be  given  every  four  hours 


•  gi'.  V. 

.  gr.  X. 

.     .  mxij. 

q.  s.  ad  ^j. 


Another  remedy  that  has  been  much  used  is  calomel.  Fairly 
large  doses  of  this  drug  have  been  given  at  the  commencement  of  an 
attack  of  dysentery,  with  the  object  of  exerting  intestinal  antisepsis, 
and  also  of  eliminating  the  specific  germ  upon  which  the  disease 
depends.  Calomel  is,  however,  of  more  service  for  chronic  dysentery 
than  for  the  acute  form. 

The  above  treatment  is  that  which  is  perhaps  most  generally 
approved  by  those  with  tropical  experience,  but  in  different  localities 
and  under  different  climatic  conditions  various  modifications  have 
been  made  ;  for  example,  in  India,  many  are  in  favor  of  using 
bael  fruit,  the  liquid  extract  of  which  is  given  in  doses  of  from  1 
fluidrachm  to  J  fluidounce.     This  drug  is  mucilaginous  in  the  fresh 


246  DIGESTION. 

state,  and  in  health  it  appears  to  act  as  a  laxative,  although  in  dysen- 
tery it  undoubtedly  lessens  the  evacuations  to  some  extent,  this 
action  being,  by  Brunton,  referred  to  an  influence  on  the  vessels  of 
the  intestine.  The  statements  made  concerning  bael  fruit  are,  how- 
ever, extremely  contradictory,  and  in  England  it  appears  to  be 
devoid  of  active  properties. 

When  dysentery  arises  in  a  malarial  district,  it  is  necessary  to 
employ  quinine,  particularly  if  the  patient  exhibits  any  indications 
of  fever.  It  is  best  to  give  quinine  in  the  middle  of  the  day,  in  a 
large  single  dose  of  15  to  20  or  25  grains  ;  but  ipecacuanha  should 
also  be  administered,  the  latter  drug  being  most  conveniently  taken 
in  the  early  morning  and  at  night-time. 

During  the  course  of  an  attack  of  acute  dysentery  there  is  often 
considerable  depression  and  collapse,  on  account  of  the  frequency  and 
amount  of  the  diarrhoea.  Symptoms  of  collapse  call  for  stimulant 
remedies,  but  the  stimulation  is  better  effected  by  diverting  the 
blood  to  the  cutaneous  vessels  than  by  the  administration  of  alcohol 
or  other  stimulant  drugs.  With  much  collapse  it  will  be  desirable 
to  employ  a  hot  bath,  and  after  the  pulse  has  somewhat  regained  its 
force  the  circulation  in  the  extremities  should  be  maintained  by  the 
use  of  hot-water  bottles  and  blankets. 

When  the  immediate  urgency  of  acute  dysentery  has  passed  aAvay, 
smaller  doses  of  ipecacuanha  may  be  given  daily  until  the  motions 
return  more  nearly  to  their  normal  condition  ;  the  patient  also  may 
be  allowed  to  have  a  more  liberal  diet  so  far  as  quantity  is  con- 
cerned, although,  until  convalescence  is  established,  milk  should  form 
the  chief  article  of  food. 

During  an  attack  of  dysentery,  it  is  stated  that  most  of  the  secre- 
tions are  either  in  a  state  of  abeyance  or  in  a  perverted  condition  ; 
thus  the  saliva  is  said  to  become  acid,  the  gastric  juice  alkaline,  and 
the  secretion  of  bile  to  be  generally  arrested..  Under  these  circum- 
stances, it  is  obviously  impossible  to  administer  solids,  or  indeed 
liquids,  which  make  any  great  call  upon  the  digestive  functions,  and 
inasmuch  as  it  is  known  that  the  large  intestine  is  in  a  state  of 
inflammation,  if  not  of  ulceration,  it  is  most  desirable  to  allow  those 
forms  of  food  only  which  leave  but  little  insoluble  residue.  Some 
practitioners  are  in  favor  of  a  milk  diet  throughout,  and  in  some 
chronic  cases  I  have  witnessed  considerable  benefit  from  this  absten- 
tion from  solids.  I  remember  one  case  in  King's  College  Hospital 
in  which  milk  was  exclusively  persisted  in  for  three  months,  earlier 


DYSENTERY.  247 

efforts  to  change  to  a  more  liberal  diet  being  attended  with  a  return 
of  dysenteric  symptoms. 

It  remains  to  say  that,  on  theoretical  grounds,  dysentery  has  fre- 
quently been  treated  with  creosote,  eucalyptus,  corrosive  sublimate, 
and  naphthalin,  all  of  which  are  administered  with  the  view  of  con- 
trolling the  influence  of  the  specific  germ  of  dysentery,  but  the 
results  obtained  do  not  appear  to  be  sufficiently  certain  to  encourage 
the  general  adoption  of  any  of  these  remedies. 

Reference  has  already  been  made  to  the  use  of  enemata  of  opium 
in  cases  marked  by  much  tenesmus,  but  enemata  sometimes  are  also 
of  especial  service  when  the  character  of  the  motions  or  the  nature 
of  the  pain  indicates  that  considerable  anatomical  changes  are  present 
in  the  lower  part  of  the  intestine.  The  enemata  may  be  employed, 
either  with  the  view  of  diminishing  tlie  frequency  of  the  diarrhoea, 
or  for  the  purpose  of  introducing  a  fairly  large  supply  of  warm 
liquid,  which,  for  the  time  being,  whether  absorbed  or  not,  frequently 
increases  the  patient's  comfort.  With  the  former  object,  various 
astringents  have  been  recommended,  as,  for  example,  alum  and  lead 
acetate.  To  be  of  any  benefit,  these  enemata  should  be  introduced 
high  into  the  intestine,  with  as  little  force  as  possible,  the  introduc- 
tion being  facilitated  by  raising  the  patient's  hips,  so  that  the  fluid 
tends  to  gravitate  along  the  descending  colon.  Dilute  solutions  of 
silver  nitrate,  8  grains  to  the  pint  of  warm  distilled  water,  have  been 
employed  to  wash  out  the  rectum  ;  and  various  antiseptics,  such  as 
creolin  (1  in  200),  have  been  given,  with  the  view  of  controlling 
amoeboid  movements.  Osier  recommends  the  injection  of  quinine 
in  cases  of  dysentery  associated  with  amoebae.  He  employs  solutions 
varying  in  strength  from  1  in  1000  to  1  in  5000. 

In  the  treatment  of  chronic  dysentery  it  is  advisable,  in  the  first 
place,  to  insist  upon  change  of  air  and  surroundings.  Many  severe 
cases  of  chronic  dysentery  improve  materially  during  the  journey 
to  temperate  climate,  and  gain  still  further  benefit  on  being  put 
under  sanitary  conditions  either  in  their  homes  or  in  a  well- 
appointed  hospital.  As  in  other  forms  of  chronic  diarrhoea,  it  is 
necessary  to  insist  upon  the  importance  of  warm  clothing,  particu- 
larly when  the  patients  are  sufficiently  well  to  be  able  to  keep  on  a 
sofa,  instead  of  being  obliged  to  remain  in  bed.  The  value  of  a 
broad  strip  of  flannel  around  the  abdomen  is  well  known  to  all  who 
have  worked  in  tropical  climates.  In  some  chronic  cases  it  is  desir- 
able to  maintain  the  purely  milk  diet  above  mentioned,  but  occasion- 


248  DIGESTION. 

ally  an  egg  may  be  beaten  up  with  it.  In  chronic  cases  astringents 
may  prove  beneficial,  but  it  is  generally  desirable  to  use  sedative 
measures,  especially  if  drugs  other  than  ipecacuanha  are  being  given 
by  the  mouth.  I  have  seen  much  benefit  result  from  the  adminis- 
tration of  bismuth  salicylate.  This  I  have  prescribed  in  cachets,  in 
doses  of  20  grains,  twice  daily,  and  marked  diminution  in  the 
number  of  motions  passed,  with  considerable  relief  of  discomfort 
has  ensued.  Sometimes  the  bismuth  salicylate  has  been  followed, 
by  flatulence,  a  trouble  that  speedily  yielded  when  2  grains  of  am- 
monium carbonate  were  given  with  each  dose  of  bismuth  sali- 
cylate. 

In  these  chronic  cases  it  is  sometimes  desirable  to  use  simple  pur- 
gatives occasionally,  especially  when  the  motions  are  unduly  offen- 
sive. Castor  oil  is  of  extreme  value  under  such  conditions,  though 
it  is  well  to  use  only  moderate  doses  of  a  drachm  or  so,  since  larger 
doses  may  excite  fresh  symptoms  of  irritation.  In  these  chronic 
cases  calomel  may  sometimes  be  substituted  for  castor  oil,  though 
this  remedy  has  to  a  great  extent  passed  out  of  fashion.  The  objec- 
tions to  the  use  of  astringents  as  well  as  to  that  of  preparations  of 
opium  do  not  hold  good  with  cases  of  chronic  dysentery.  After 
ipecacuanha  has  had  a  fair  trial  and  has  been  given  for  a  length  of 
time,  astringent  preparations — for  example,  cinchona,  kino,  and  cate- 
chu— are  sometimes  of  great  service,  and  the  administration  of  a 
powder  containing  kino,  75  per  cent.  ;  opium,  5  per  cent.  ;  and 
cinnamon,  20  per  cent.,  is  often  attended  with  success. 

In  chronic  dysentery  considerable  anaemia  frequently  results,  and 
this  symptom  is  best  treated,  according  to  Dr.  Maclean,  with  a  solu- 
tion of  pernitrate  of  iron.  He  states  that  during  the  administration 
of  this  drug  the  color  speedily  improves,  while  the  stools  become 
more  natural  and  less  frequent,  and  the  digestion  is  more  perfectly 
performed.  When  the  extreme  urgency  of  symptoms  has  subsided, 
further  restoration  may  be  effected  by  the  employment  of  citrate  of 
iron  and  quinine.  When  associated  with  symptoms  of  scurvy,  or 
of  purpura,  antiscorbutic  remedies  must  be  adopted,  and  foremost 
among  these  lies  the  frequent  administration  of  lemon  juice.  As 
appetite  is  restored,  and  the  frequency  of  the  stools  become  less, 
the  diet  may  be  rendered  more  liberal,  concentrated  soups  being 
given  in  addition  to  milk  ;  and  if  these  are  well  tolerated,  solids 
may  by  degrees  be  added,  as,  for  example,  boiled  chicken,  lamb,  or 
mutton. 


INTESTINAL  OBSTRUCTION  249 

The  treatment  of  dysentery^  was  under  discussion  at  the  meeting 
of  the  British  Medical  Association  in  1898,  and  considerable  differ- 
ence of  opinion  was  elicited. 

Sandwith  (British  Medical  Journal,  September  24,  1898),  as  the 
result  of  experience  at  Cairo,  is  inclined  to  discard  the  use  of  ipecac- 
uanha, even  when  prescribed  in  the  de-emetinized  form.  He  pre- 
fers to  use  magnesium  sulphate  in  doses  of  1  drachm  every  hour 
until  the  bowels  are  well  emptied.  Latterly  he  has  trusted  largely 
to  enemata,  especially  to  those  containing  copper  sulphate,  and  he 
employs  these  even  in  acute  cases. 

Major  Davidson,  on  the  contrary,  is  of  opinion  that  ipecacuanha 
is  useful  in  checking  the  disease  in  its  early  stage  by  causing  exuda- 
tion from  the  mucous  membrane,  and  thus  allaying  tension  and 
inflammation.  Lieut.-Colonel  Crombie  also  believes  that  ipecacu- 
anha is  of  great  service  in  true  acute  dysentery.  He  gives  it  in 
large  doses,  having  previously  administered  chloral. 

Captain  Johnston  {BritisJi  Medical  Journal,  April  16,  1898)  testi- 
fies, on  the  other  hand,  from  his  Indian  experience,  that  ipecacuanha 
has  not  the  effect  with  which  it  was  formerly  credited.  He,  like 
many  others,  strongly  recommends  magnesium  sulphate.  He  says 
that  patients  may  come  into  the  hospital  passing  fifteen  stools  a  day 
containing  blood  and  slime,  and  that  when  treated  in  the  following 
manner  the  average  duration  of  the  attack  is  only  two  or  three  days, 
even  for  those  on  field  service.  The  patient  is  at  once  put  on  a 
purely  milk  diet,  and  is  given  2  drachms  of  magnesium  sulphate 
every  four  hours,  combined  with  aromatic  sulphuric  acid,  5  minims 
(to  counteract  any  severe  griping  that  may  be  caused),  till  the  flow 
of  bile  is  well  established,  as  seen  in  the  stools. 

In  Great  Britain,  however,  where  chronic  dysentery  alone  comes 
under  observation,  the  general  consensus  of  opinion  points  to  abso- 
lute rest,  a  milk  diet,  and  treatment  by  large  slow  irrigation  with 
boric,  quinine,  or  silver  nitrate  solutions,  with  or  without  the  internal 
administration  of  bismuth  salicylate  and  salol. 

Intestinal  Obstruction.  The  symptoms  of  intestinal  obstruc- 
tion to  some  extent  depend  upon  the  cause  of  obstruction,  and  they 
vary  greatly  according  to  whether  the  cause  is  one  which  acts  sud- 
denly or  gradually.  It  has  already  been  indicated  that  in  some 
cases  diarrhoea  may  result  from  obstruction  of  the  course  of  the 

1  Year  Book  of  Treatment,  1899. 


250  DIGESTION. 

intestine  by  a  fecal  mass,  which  produces  irritation  at  the  site  of 
impaction,  and  reference  has  already  been  made  to  the  spurious 
form  of  diarrhoea,  or  rather  the  condition  which  is  frequently 
described  by  the  patient  as  diarrhoea,  when  the  obstruction  is  partial 
and  leads  to  the  passage  of  small  scybalous  masses,  or  tape-like 
motions,  together  with  much  mucus  and  blood,  as,  for  example,  in 
many  cases  of  malignant  disease  of  the  lower  part  of  the  intestine. 
But,  in  addition  to  these,  we  are  frequently  called  upon  to  deal 
with  intestinal  obstruction,  which  may  occur  with  comparative  sud- 
denness, while  at  the  same  time  the  cause  of  obstruction  may  not  be 
very  obvious. 

The  course  to  be  adopted  depends  to  a  very  great  extent  upon 
the  diagnosis,  though  frequently  the  treatment,  if  surgical,  is  to  be 
regarded  in  the  light  of  an  exploratory  operation  to  ascertain  and  to 
remove,  if  possible,  the  cause  of  obstruction.  It  may  be  well,  there- 
fore, to  classify  briefly  the  chief  conditions  under  which  intestinal 
obstruction  may  arise. 

In  early  life  the  commonest  cause  is  undoubtedly  intussusception, 
which  occurs  most  frequently  at  the  ileo-csecal  valve  with  the  invagi- 
nation of  a  portion  of  the  small  intestine  into  the  csecum  ;  this 
invagination  may  involve  not  only  the  ileum,  but  a  portion  of  the 
large  intestine  may  be  forced  onward,  partly  by  straining  efforts, 
and  partly  by  the  contractions  of  the  ascending  colon.  This  condi- 
tion is  associated  with  considerable  evidence  of  pain  and  of  collapse, 
the  appearance  of  a  child  with  intussusception  being  extremely  char- 
acteristic, even  when  the  condition  is  of  recent  development.  Intus- 
susception may  be  suspected  when  a  child,  previously  in  good  health, 
or  perhaps  suffering  from  diarrhoea,  becomes  suddenly  collapsed, 
and  passes  motions  containing  blood.  In  extreme  cases,  examina- 
tion by  the  rectum  may  disclose  the  presence  of  a  tumor  consisting 
of  the  invaginated  intestine.  Frequently,  however,  this  cannot  be 
reached,  and  the  diagnosis  has  to  be  based  upon  the  nature  of  the 
stools,  the  tenesmus,  and  the  existence  of  a  tumor,  which  is  generally 
in  the  position  of  the  transverse  colon.  This  tumor  may  sometimes 
be  made  out  with  comparative  ease,  but  occasionally  the  exact  limi- 
tations can  only  be  ascertained  during  the  administration  of  an 
anaesthetic. 

The  treatment  of  intussusception  is  mainly  surgical,  though  numer- 
ous measures  have  been  recommended  for  adoption  while  the  diag- 
nosis remains  uncertain,   or  pending  the  opportunity  of   securing 


INTESTINAL  OBSTBUOTION.  251 

surgical  assistance  ;  thus,  the  pain  may  be  relieved  by  the  hypo- 
dermatic administration  of  morphine,  or  hot  fomentations  may  be 
applied  over  the  surface  of  the  abdomen,  to  relieve  spasm.  Copious 
injections  of  water  have  been  said  to  be  beneficial,  and  at  one  time 
it  was  advised  that  the  colon  should  be  distended  with  air,  with 
the  view  of  forcing  back  the  invaginated  portion  of  the  intestine. 
This  proceeding,  although  stated  to  have  occasionally  given  satisfac- 
tory results,  is  not  now  generally  recommended,  since,  although  it 
is  undoubtedly  possible  thus  to  force  back  the  greater  part  that  has 
become  invaginated,  there  is  great  probability  of  a  portion  of  the 
intestine  remaining  unreduced,  and  so  long  as  this  is  the  case,  there 
is  extreme  likelihood  of  the  return  of  intussusception,  and  also  great 
risk  of  the  invaginated  portion  undergoing  necrotic  changes.  The 
plan,  therefore,  which  is  now  commonly  followed,  is  the  examina- 
tion of  the  child  by  the  rectum,  as  well  as  through  the  abdominal 
wall,  under  an  anaesthetic  ;  and  if  this  indicates  intussusception, 
an  attempt  may  sometimes  be  made  to  return  the  invaginated  bowel 
by  injection  or  by  inflation  ;  but  if  these  fail,  no  time  should  be  lost 
before  the  early  performance  of  an  operation.  The  injection  of  fluid 
is  preferable  to  inflation,  since  the  force  employed  can  be  more 
readily  estimated.  Normal  salt  solution  at  a  temperature  of  100° 
to  105°  F.  may  be  used  by  an  irrigator  which  should  not  be  raised 
more  than  three  feet  above  the  level  of  the  bowel,  to  avoid  the  risks 
of  sudden  overstrain.  Steady,  long-continued  distention  under  a  low 
pressure  is  more  safe  and  more  efficacious  than  rapid  dilatation 
under  a  high  pressure.  The  chance  of  recovery  depends  greatly 
upon  early  reduction,  since  the  development  of  peritonitis  is  favored 
by  delay,  and  there  is  also  the  risk  that  strangulation  of  the  invagi- 
nated intestine  may  lead  to  ulceration  and  perhaps  perforation. 

When  acute  intestinal  obstruction  is  due  to  the  presence  of  malig- 
nant changes  in  the  wall  of  the  intestine,  the  symptoms  will  arise 
later  in  life.  The  history  will  in  all  probability  disclose  the  fact 
that,  previous  to  the  urgent  symptoms  of  obstruction,  the  patient 
has  for  some  months  been  troubled  with  frequent  motions,  passed 
with  considerable  straining  and  difficulty,  and  sometimes  attended 
with  the  passage  of  mucus  and  blood.  Under  such  circumstances, 
prior  to  symptoms  of  complete  obstruction,  considerable  benefit  may 
sometimes  ensue  from  the  use  of  simple  laxatives,  such  as  the  confec- 
tion of  senna  or  of  sulphur,  or  the  compound  liquorice  powder. 
With  severe  pain  and  complete  arrest  of  action,  vomiting  will  gener- 


252  DIGESTION. 

ally  be  superadded,  and,  as  a  rule,  it  is  possible  to  detect  the  pres- 
ence of  a  tumor  consisting  mainly  of  fecal  accumulations  above  the 
site  of  obstruction.  These  fecal  masses  usually  occupy  the  sigmoid 
flexure,  and  are  therefore  to  be  found  in  the  left  iliac  region  ;  but 
I  have  known  cases  in  which  the  tumor,  resulting  from  fecal  accu- 
mulation in  the  sigmoid  flexure,  extended  across  the  abdomen  to 
the  right  of  the  middle  line  and  occupied  the  position  of  the  csecum, 
thus  simulating  the  condition  generally  met  with  in  obstruction  at 
the  ileo-csecal  valve,  or  in  appendicitis. 

With  such  symptoms,  medicines  can  be  of  little  service,  the 
utmost  that-  can  be  hoped  for  from  the  administration  of  drugs  being 
the  temporary  relief  of  pain,  pending  the  adoption  of  more  radical 
measures.  As  the  diagnosis  is,  however,  occasionally  extremely 
obscure,  it  is  necessary  to  examine  by  the  rectum,  and  to  determine, 
if  possible,  whether  the  impaction  of  feces  results  merely  from 
chronic  constipation,  in  which  case  the  fecal  mass  may  probably  be 
reached  by  rectal  examination  ;  or  whether  the  rectum  is  empty,  in 
which  case  the  malignant  growth  may  frequently  with  some  diffi- 
culty be  reached.  If  it  is  clear  that  the  obstruction  is  due  to  malig- 
nant disease,  purgatives  will  be  of  no  service,  and  may  indeed  be 
dangerous.  Enemata  may  be  employed  with  caution  ;  but  in  all 
probability  it  will  be  impossible,  by  means  of  enemata,  to  effect  any 
dislodgement  of  the  accumulation,  and,  pending  the  adoption  of  sur- 
gical treatment,  palliative  measures  must  be  used,  such  as  the  hypo- 
dermatic injection  of  morphine,  or  the  administration  of  opium  or 
morphine  by  the  mouth,  while  fomentations  over  the  site  of  pain 
will  also  occasionally  give  much  relief. 

To  check  vomiting,  it  has  been  recommended  that  the  stomach 
should  be  washed  out  with  a  stomach  tube,  and  it  will  always  be 
found  necessary  to  minimize  the  probability  of  the  occurrence  of 
further  vomiting,  partly  by  allowing  the  patient  to  suck  ice  fre- 
quently, and  partly  by  the  administration  of  nutriment  in  the  form 
of  liquids.  With  definite  acute  obstruction  arising  from  malignant 
disease,  operation  is  imperative,  if  the  strength  of  the  patient  will 
permit.  Symptoms  of  intestinal  obstruction  may  frequently  arise 
in  connection  with  other  causes  than  those  above  named,  as,  for 
example,  with  constriction  of  the  intestine  by  peritoneal  bands,  the 
result  of  previous  attacks  of  peritonitis.  In  these  cases,  also, 
although  the  diagnosis  is  generally  somewhat  uncertain,  surgical 
aid   should   be   sought,  though  sometimes   the   administration  of 


INTESTINAL  OBSTRUCTION.  253 

opium  and  the  use  of  belladonna  may  be  followed  by  some  improve- 
ment. 

More  hopeful  are  the  cases  of  obstruction  due  to  the  presence  of 
abdominal  or  pelvic  tumors  pressing  upon,  or  dragging  upon,  some 
portion  of  the  intestine.  Occasionally  we  may  meet  with  cases 
where  the  existence  of  a  tumor  has  long  been  known  to  the  patient 
or  to  the  medical  attendant,  and  in  which  the  symptoms  of  obstruc- 
tion have  arisen  either  gradually  or  suddenly  from  some  alteration 
in  the  position  or  in  the  size  of  the  tumor.  Ovarian  cysts  are  per- 
haps the  most  frequent  causes  of  this  condition,  but  obstruction  has 
been  known  to  result  from  gradual  enlargement  of  the  uterus,  espe- 
cially when  displaced,  or  from  gradual  enlargement  of  the  kidney,  if 
the  seat  of  tubercular  or  malignant  disease.  Under  such  circum- 
stances it  is  occasionally  possible  to  afford  relief  by  manipulation  of 
the  tumor,  and  thus  to  diminish  the  amount  of  pressure  which  it 
may  be  exerting  upon  the  intestine.  When  an  ovarian  cyst  is  pres- 
ent, the  immediate  danger  will  be  largely  reduced  by  the  removal 
of  liquid  by  tapping,  although  the  question  of  more  radical  measures 
for  affording  permanent  relief  should  be  discussed  with  the  patient 
or  her  friends.  Pending  the  decision  on  this  matter,  efforts  should 
be  made  to  reduce  the  fecal  accumulation  by  the  use  of  copious 
enemata,  the  introduction  being  facilitated  by  the  position  of  the 
patient  and  by  the  use  of  a  long,  flexible  tube. 

In  connection  with  chronic  constipation,  symptoms  of  obstruc- 
tion may  arise,  and  the  condition  must  be  dealt  with  by  enemata 
of  quantities  of  warm  soap  and  water,  to  which  an  ounce  or  more 
of  olive  oil  may  with  advantage  be  added.  When  the  direct  pressure 
upon  the  intestine  has  been  relieved,  it  will  be  advisable  to  employ 
purgatives  or  laxatives,  such  as  castor  oil,  or  the  compound  senna 
mixture,  or,  as  already  mentioned,  the  confection  of  senna  or  of 
sulphur  may  be  used.  If  the  fecal  mass  has  become  very  firm,  it 
should  be  softened,  previous  to  the  employment  of  these  laxatives, 
by  the  rectal  injection  of  3  or  4  ounces  of  olive  oil,  and  if  no  relief 
follows  within  twelve  hours  or  so,  it  will  be  advisable  to  use  a  copi- 
ous warm  enema  of  soap  and  water.  When  the  obstruction  results 
from  simple  accumulation  of  feces  in  the  rectum  or  in  the  sigmoid 
flexure,  it  will  be  necessary  to  remove  the  mass,  or  as  much  of  it  as 
can  be  reached,  by  breaking  it  down  with  the  finger,  or  by  using  a 
metal  scoop  or  the  handle  of  a  spoon,  to  facilitate  the  disintegration 
of  the  fecal  mass.     When  the  lower  part  of  the  bowel  is  thus  dis- 


254  DIGESTION. 

tended,  enemata  are  of  very  little  use,  as  the  bowel  has  lost  its  con- 
tractile power. 

When  the  obstruction  is  due  to  chronic  constipation,  it  is  necessary 
to  be  extremely  cautious  in  the  use  of  opium,  since  this  remedy  will 
greatly  favor  a  continuance  of  constipation  ;  if  used  at  all  under  such 
circumstances,  small  doses  should  be  given  sufficient  only  to  allay 
pain,  or  to  diminish  its  acute  character.  Occasionally  considerable 
relief  may  follow  from  careful  manipulation  of  the  bowel  over  the 
site  of  obstruction,  and  the  chances  of  relief  may  be  increased  by  the 
adoption  of  this  method  during  the  use  of  a  warm  bath,  or  during 
the  administration  of  an  anaesthetic,  either  of  which  will  favor  the 
relaxation  of  any  obstructing  spasm.  To  be  of  any  service,  these 
measures  must  be  adopted  soon  after  the  onset  of  the  symptoms  of 
obstruction  ;  at  a  later  period,  if  employed  in  the  presence  of  inflam- 
matory changes  in  the  wall  of  the  intestine,  abdominal  taxis  might 
be  dangerous.  In  conclusion,  it  must  be  repeated  that  as  the  diag- 
nosis in  intestinal  obstruction  is  so  frequently  obscure,  and  the meas- 
ures for  relief  are  so  largely  surgical,  it  will  be  advisable  in  all  cases 
of  doubt  to  obtain  the  co-operation  of  a  surgeon  at  an  early  date. 


CHAPTEE   XI. 

J)IGEST10l!i— Continued. 

Appendicitis — Typhlitis  and  Perityphlitis — Acute  Peritonitis — Chronic  Peritonitis 
— Tuberculous  Peritonitis — Animal  Pai-asites  Affecting  the  Intestine — Thread- 
worms— Kound-worms — Tape-worms — Hydatids  of  the  Liver — Trichinosis. 

Appendicitis.  Appendicitis  is  always  associated  with  pain  in  the 
right  iliac  region  ;  the  pain  occurs  suddenly,  with  an  increase  of  tem- 
perature, and  perhaps  with  considerable  sickness,  though  the  last 
symptom  may  occasionally  be  absent.  It  usually  arises  first  in 
comparatively  early  life,  and  even  when  the  acute  attack  has  passed 
off  it  is  extremely  likely  to  be  followed  by  subsequent  attacks. 
The  inflammation  of  the  appendix  may  be  dependent  upon  the  pres- 
ence of  foreign  bodies,  such  as  apple  pips,  but  far  more  commonly 
the  solid  body  within^  the  appendix  consists  of  inspissated  mucus 
and  feces  which  have  undergone  changes  with  deposition  of  lime 
salts.  The  inflammation  of  the  appendix  often  leads  to  ulceration, 
and  this  in  turn  may  cause  perforation  with  severe  suppurative 
peritonitis.  More  frequently,  however,  the  ulceration  causes  a  local- 
ized peritonitis,  and  the  pus  that  is  formed  may  burrow  in  almost 
any  direction  ;  thus  it  may  occasionally  pass  forward  and  point  mid- 
way between  the  umbilicus  and  the  anterior  superior  iliac  spine. 
But  I  have  seen  two  cases  in  which  the  pus  accumulated  in  the  retro- 
peritoneal tissues  behind  the  caecum,  and  passed  upward  and  back- 
ward in  the  lumbar  region. 

The  treatment  of  appendicitis  necessarily  involves  the  adoption 
of  measures  calculated  to  diminish  all  abdominal  movements  and  to 
reduce  the  intestinal  contractions  ;  in  other  words,  the  patient  must 
be  kept  in  bed  so  long  as  there  are  any  indications  of  pain  or  of 
tenderness  in  the  region  of  the  appendix,  and  the  diet  should  be 
confined  to  the  use  of  liquids  given  in  small  quantities  and  repeated 
frequently,  if  need  be.  Considerable  difference  of  opinion  has  been 
expressed  concerning  the  use  of  opium  in  appendicitis,  although 
the  pain  is  so  great  that  the  administration  of  this  drug  appears 
almost  imiperative.  The  use  of  opium  is  objected  to  by  surgeons, 
since  it  may  produce  a  false  feeling  of  security  by  masking  the 
symptoms.     It  is  held,  for  example,  that  if  the  patient   is   kept 


256  DIGESTION. 

fairly  free  from  pain  by  the  use  of  opium,  indications  of  suppura- 
tion may  be  obscured,  and  the  chances  of  successful  operation  at  an 
early  date  may  thus  be  reduced.  While  this  objection  holds  good 
against  the  use  of  large  doses  of  opium,  physicians  generally  con- 
sider it  to  be  good  practice  to  use  small  doses  enough  to  give  at 
least  some  degree  of  relief,  although  not  sufficient  to  cause  complete 
narcosis.  Pain  may  also  be  relieved  locally  by  the  employment  of 
hot  fomentations,  of  turpentine  stupes,  or  of  poultices  sprinkled  with 
laudanum  or  with  belladonna.  It  is  also  well  to  commence  treat- 
ment with  the  use  of  enemata  of  warm  soap  and  water,  so  as  to 
relieve  the  lower  bowel  of  its  contents  with  the  minimum  of  mus- 
cular exertion.  This  measure  is  the  more  necessary,  as  appendicitis 
most  commonly  occurs  in  connection  with  chronic  constipation,  and 
the  comfort  will  be  greatly  increased  by  such  removal  of  fecal  accu- 
mulations, which  might  otherwise  entail  considerable  headache  or 
involve  the  risk  of  straining  efforts. 

It  has  been  urged  that  at  the  commencement  cases  of  appendicitis 
should  be  treated  with  saline  purgatives ;  the  arguments  in  favor  of 
this  course  being  in  the  first  place  the  frequency  of  constipation,  and 
in  the  second  place  the  possibility  of  diminishing  inflammatory  pro- 
cesses by  temporarily  depleting  the  vessels  of  the  intestine ;  but  in 
general  it  is  not  only  unnecessary,  but  indeed  unsafe,  to  resort  to 
purgatives  of  any  kind,  since  the  severe  pain  of  appendicitis  is  most 
commonly  an  indication,  not  so  much  of  inflammation  of  the  appen- 
dix, as  of  inflammation  of  surrounding  tissues.  Indeed,  it  may  be 
questioned  whether  any  case  of  appendicitis  is  ever  wholly  free  from 
some  degree  of  peritonitis,  or  from  some  inflammation  in  the  tissues 
outside  the  peritoneal  cavity.  Under  such  circumstances,  it  is  obvi- 
ously undesirable  to  employ  any  measures  which,  by  causing  increased 
peristalsis  of  the  intestine,  will  necessarily  involve  increased  disturb- 
ance of  the  peritoneum.  The  peritonitis  of  mild  cases  of  ajspendi- 
citis  is  happily  generally  localized,  and  the  safety  of  the  patient  will 
to  a  large  extent  depend  upon  the  limitation  of  the  peritonitis  to 
the  small  area  primarily  involved.  By  the  use  of  saline  purgatives, 
or  indeed  of  any  purgatives,  there  is  considerable  risk  of  so  far 
disturbing  the  viscera  as  to  convert  a  localized  into  a  generalized 
peritonitis.  Further,  if  the  peritonitis  is  associated  with  ulceration 
and  perforation  of  the  appendix,  the  form  of  peritonitis  which  may 
follow  the  use  of  purgatives  will  necessarily  be  very  severe.  On 
all  grounds,  therefore,  it  appears  wiser  to  be  content  with  the  admin- 


APPENDICITIS.  257 

istration  of  the  minimum  quantity  of  liquid  nourishment  required, 
and  with  emptying  the  lower  portion  of  the  intestine  by  the  use  of 
enemata,  pending  the  subsidence  of  the  inflammation  and  the  forma- 
tion of  adhesions  of  a  protective  nature.  In  a  comparatively  large 
proportion  of  cases,  whether  ulceration  has  occurred  or  not,  recovery 
will  follow  with  gradually  subsiding  symptoms.  This  pain  will 
diminish  and  the  rigidity  of  the  abdominal  muscles  will  relax,  while 
the  temperature  will  return  to  the  normal. 

Should  symptoms  of  abdominal  pain  increase  suddenly  and  be 
accompanied  by  indications  of  collapse,  the  occurrence  of  perfora- 
tion must  be  suspected,  and  the  dangers  of  the  condition  must  be 
represented  to  the  patient  and  to  his  friends,  and  the  chance  of 
operation  should  be  offered.  Even  when  the  operation  has  been 
refused,  the  case  is  by  no  means  hopeless.  The  treatment  adapted 
to  early  perforative  peritonitis  will  be  required,  entailing  the  use  of 
opium  in  repeated  doses,  and  the  application  of  fomentations  or 
poultices  over  the  abdomen. 

In  the  milder  form  of  appendicitis,  when  the  inflammation  is  sub- 
siding, the  question  of  the  administration  of  laxatives  must  again 
arise,  and  considerable  discretion  must  be  shown  in  selecting  the 
right  time  for  their  employment.  If  possible,  it  is  desirable  to 
obtain  evacuation  of  the  intestine,  either  by  natural  efforts  or  by 
enemata,  within  the  first  few  days  of  the  subsidence  of  the  attack  ; 
but  when  the  abdominal  pain  has  practically  ceased,  a  tumor  may 
often  be  felt  in  the  region  of  the  appendix,  and  the  size  of  this  tumor 
may  generally  be  reduced  under  the  judicious  administration  of 
repeated  small  doses  of  calomel. 

Even  after  convalescence  has  appeared  to  be  fully  established  and 
the  patient  no  longer  complains  of  any  discomfort,  and  indeed  con- 
siders himself  well,  the  risks  of  a  return  of  the  inflammation  must 
be  borne  in  mind.  One  attack  of  appendicitis  is  frequently  the 
forerunner  of  several  others,  and  when  appendicitis  recurs,  the  inter- 
ference with  work  and  comfort,  and  the  risks  involved  with  each 
attack,  render  it  the  more  necessary  to  urge  the  advisability  of  oper- 
ative measures  for  relief.  Recurrent  appendicitis  very  often  depends 
upon  a  small  focus  of  inflammation.  Pus  may  have  formed  during 
the  first  attack,  and  if  not  evacuated,  either  through  natural  chan- 
nels or  by  means  of  operative  measures,  the  amount  of  pus  around 
the  inflamed  appendix  may  increase  and  may  at  any  time  cause 
alarming  symptoms. 

17 


258  DIGESTION. 

In  the  course  of  operation  for  the  relief  of  this  condition,  the  use 
of  a  trocar  for  diagnostic  purposes  has  been  recommended,  and  it 
has  been  suggested  that,  if  pus  is  discovered  either  with  a  trocar  or 
with  an  exploring  syringe,  the  site  of  the  collection  should  be  freely 
incised  with  appropriate  precautions.  Most  surgeons  are  at  present 
averse  to  the  use  of  the  trocar  or  of  any  such  interference  with  a 
possible  abscess  cavity,  since,  although  an  uncertain  diagnosis  may 
thus  be  confirmed,  there  is  the  attendant  risk  of  allowing  some  of 
the  contents  of  the  abscess  cavity  to  escape  into  the  peritoneum  and 
to  excite  peritonitis. 

In  conclusion,  it  may  be  well  to  summarize  the  general  indica- 
tions for  operative  interference  : 

1.  During  an  acute  attack  an  operation  may  be  called  for  on 
account  of  the  severity  of  the  general  symptoms  ;  for  instance,  when 
the  pain  is  extremely  distressing  and  seems  to  be  increasing ;  when 
the  temperature  is  high  and  appears  to  be  rising ;  and  when  the 
pulse  is  rapid  and  weak.  These  symptoms  will  indicate  the  desir- 
ability of  operating,  even  in  the  absence  of  any  definite  tumor, 
since  it  must  be  remembered  that  sometimes  the  tumor  of  appen- 
dicitis is  comparatively  small,  and  that  frequently  it  is  masked  by 
the  rigidity  of  the  abdominal  walls. 

2.  Operation  will  be  indicated  if  there  is  a  tumor  and  the  severity 
of  the  symptoms  appears  to  be  on  the  increase.  The  mere  presence 
of  a  tumor  is  not  always  sufficient  indication  for  operation,  since,  as 
already  mentioned,  tumors  may  form  and  may  gradually  diminish 
in  size  while  the  general  symptoms  abate.  If,  therefore,  there  are 
any  indications  of  improvement,  if  the  tumor  either  remains  the 
same  size  or  gradually  diminishes  in  size,  operative  measures  may 
be  deferred. 

3.  The  question  of  operation  should  be  considered  with  recurrent 
attacks  of  appendicitis.  In  general,  in  recurrent  attacks  it  is  better 
for  the  operation  to  be  performed  during  an  interval  of  relative  free-r 
dom  from  pain. 

In  such  a  work  as  the  present  it  is  unnecessary  to  describe  the 
nature  of  the  operative  measures  to  be  adopted.  It  must  suffice  to 
remind  the  reader  that  since  the  introduction  of  the  antiseptic  method 
of  dealing  with  abdominal  surgery,  the  risks  of  such  operations  are 
infinitely  less  than  the  dangers  that  might  be  incurred  by  delay. 

Typhlitis  and  Perityphlitis.  These  terms  have  been  employed 
to  indicate  inflammation  in  the  caecum  or  in  the  tissues  around  the 


PERITONITIS.  269 

csecum — conditions  which  may  undoubtedly  occur  from  the  reten- 
tion of  fecal  masses  in  the  csecum,  though  in  all  probability  a  large 
number  of  cases  of  so-called  typhlitis  and  perityphlitis  include  the 
milder  forms  of  appendicitis. 

As  a  rule,  these  cases  are  to  be  treated  on  the  principles  above 
described  in  connection  with  appendicitis,  and  indeed  the  diagnosis 
is  frequently  so  uncertain  that,  although  it  may  be  hoped  that  the 
case  is  one  of  simple  typhlitis,  it  is  advisable  to  adopt  all  the  pre- 
cautions suitable  for  a  case  of  appendicitis.  In  these  conditions  it 
has  been  recommended  that  efforts  should  be  made  to  remove  from 
the  csecum  fecal  accumulations  which  may  be  the  source  of  irritation, 
and  that,  therefore,  saline  purgatives,  such  as  magnesium  sulphate, 
or  sodium  sulphate,  should  be  given  repeatedly  with  the  view  of 
completely  evacuating  the  large  intestine,  and  also  that  this  method 
of  relief  should  be  assisted  by  the  use  of  copious  enemata  of  warm 
soap  and  water.  The  uncertainty  of  diagnosis  appears  to  me  to  pre- 
clude this  course  of  treatment,  and  I  prefer  the  employment  of  mod- 
erate doses  of  opium  and  the  adoption  of  local  sedative  measures, 
such  as  warm  fomentations  and  the  application  of  opium  or  bella- 
donna over  the  site  of  pain,  pending  the  elucidation  of  the  case  by 
more  definite  indications.  It  is  not  advisable,  however,  to  trust  too 
implicitly  to  these  palliatives.  The  practitioner  must  be  constantly 
on  his  guard  against  the  probability  of  suppuration  and  against  the 
danger  of  symptoms  of  general  peritonitis,  and  while  waiting  anx- 
iously for  symptoms,  it  is  essential  not  to  be  too  energetic  in  endeav- 
oring to  make  out  the  exact  limitations  of  a  tumor  by  manipulation^ 
If  opium  is  used  in  moderate  doses,  sufficient  to  relieve  the  acuteness 
of  pain,  the  other  indications,  such  as  oscillations  of  temperature  or- 
alterations  in  the  character  of  the  pulse,  will  in  all  probability  serve 
to  indicate  the  need  of  operative  interference.  Of  recent  years  the 
opinion  has  been  gaining  ground  that  typhlitis  and  perityphlitis  in- 
dependent of  appendicitis  are  rare  conditions,  if  indeed  they  ever 
occur. 

Peritonitis.  Peritonitis  occurs  under  many  forms  and  under 
various  conditions.  The  treatment  of  peritonitis  must  greatly  de- 
pend upon  the  cause  of  the  affection  and  upon  the  extent  to  which 
the  peritoneum  is  involved.  Partial  or  localized  peritonitis  must 
frequently  be  treated  by  measures  mainly  directed  against  the  cause 
of  the  local  inflammation.  Chronic  peritonitis — which  may  occur 
in  connection  with  new  growths,  such  as  carcinoma  or  tubercle  within 


260  DIGESTION. 

the  peritoneal  cavity — and  acute  general  peritonitis  will  both  require 
separate  detailed  consideration. 

A.  Acute  general  peritonitis  occurs  under  two  conditions  :  First,  as 
a  primary  idiopathic  disease,  the  result  of  exposure  to  cold  or  wet, 
or  in  connection  with  the  termination  of  some  forms  of  Briffht's 
disease.  Secondary  peritonitis  results  either  from  perforation  of  one 
of  the  abdominal  viscera  into  the  peritoneal  cavity,  or  from  the  ex- 
tension of  inflammation  from  one  or  other  of  the  organs  covered 
with  the  peritoneum.  Hence,  it  may  occur  with  diseases  of  the 
stomach  or  of  the  intestine,  involving  inflammation,  ulceration,  or 
perforation ;  or  it  may  depend  upon  suppurative  processes  in  con- 
nection with  the  appendix,  or  with  the  Fallopian  tubes  ;  it  may  also 
be  due  to  direct  injury  of  the  peritoneum,  either  from  wounds  or  from 
other  forms  of  external  violence. 

The  indications  of  acute  peritonitis  are  sufficiently  well  marked. 
They  consist  in  the  more  or  less  sudden  development  of  pain,  com- 
mencing perhaps  over  the  site  of  injury,  but  speedily  radiating 
through  the  whole  of  the  abdominal  cavity,  and  increased  immensely 
by  the  slightest  pressure  over  the  abdominal  wall.  This  pain  is 
quickly  followed  by  distention  of  the  walls  of  the  abdomen,  due 
mainly  to  the  accumulation  of  gas  in  the  intestine.  The  tympanitic 
condition  of  the  intestine  appears  to  be  the  direct  consequence  of  a 
partial  or  complete  paralysis  of  its  walls.  This  paralytic  condition 
is  speedily  followed  by  constipation,  which  in  turn  contributes  to 
increase  the  tympanitic  distention.  From  the  commencement  of  the 
attack  respiration  is  hurried,  though  shallow,  the  respiratory  move- 
ments being  effected  entirely  or  almost  entirely  by  the  thorax,  the 
movements  of  the  diaphragm  being  in  abeyance,  owing  to  the  intense 
pain  excited  by  any  alteration  in  its  position.  With  the  onset  of  the 
attack  the  temperature  commonly  rises,  gradually  reaching  104°  or 
105°  F.  in  the  course  of  a  few  hours  ;  meanwhile  the  pulse  increases 
in  rapidity,  and  though  as  a  rule  it  is  wiry,  in  cases  due  to  perfora- 
tion it  may  be  almost  imperceptible.  Very  often  vomiting  ensues 
within  a  short  time,  and  if  prolonged  may  speedily  become  green 
and  bilious.  The  patient  suffers  greatly  from  thirst,  the  appetite 
fails  entirely,  the.  tongue  commonly  becomes  dry,  and  though  it  is 
rarely  coated,  it  frequently  becomes  red  and  raw  in  appearance. 

In  the  above  brief  account  of  the  leading  symptoms  of  acute  peri- 
tonitis we  obtain  abundant  indications  for  treatment,  though  it  is 
often  necessary  to  modify  the  treatment  in  accordance  with  the  cause. 


PERITONITIS.  261 

In  every  case  of  acute  peritonitis  the  pain  is  so  severe,  and  tlie  patient 
feels  so  ill,  that  he  instinctively  keeps  in  bed,  and  unconsciously 
maintains  a  rigid  position,  so  as  to  avoid  any  movements  of  the 
abdominal  muscles.  In  perforative  cases  the  patient  has  probably 
been  already  kept  in  bed  on  account  of  the  disease  which  has  led  to 
perforation. 

With  the  commencement  of  the  affection  it  is  well  to  direct  atten- 
tion in  the  first  place  to  the  relief  of  pain,  and  accordingly,  in  acute 
primary  peritonitis,  it  is  essential  to  administer  opium  or  morphine, 
and  to  employ  local  measures  for  controlling  inflammation  and  allay- 
ing pain.  It  will  be  convenient,  for  the  present,  to  consider  cases  of 
primary  peritonitis  only,  or  at  any  rate  those  cases  of  peritonitis  in 
which  operative  measures  do  not  appear  to  be  demanded.  Under 
these  circumstances  some  relief  may  be  afforded  by  applying  leeches 
over  the  abdomen,  and,  after  they  have  been  removed,  a  large  lin- 
seed-meal poultice,  to  increase  the  amount  of  hemorrhage.  Should 
leeches  be  unavailable,  the  linseed  poultice  should  be  at  once  em- 
ployed, and  pending  its  preparation,  warm  fomentations  sprinkled 
with  laudanum  will  be  of  service.  In  the  use  of  poultices  for  peri- 
tonitis the  utmost  care  must  be  taken  by  the  nurse  to  make  them 
as  light  and  as  warm  as  possible,  and  to  be  very  gentle  both  in  the 
removal  and  the  reapplication  of  poultices.  Even  with  the  greatest 
care,  however,  complaint  is  likely  to  follow  the  first  application  of 
the  poultice,  since  the  slight  weight  tends  to  disturb  the  relation  of 
the  abdominal  viscicra.  The  patient,  however,  soon  learns  that  the 
relief  afforded  by  the  poultice  is  so  great  that  it  is  worth  enduring 
the  momentary  increase  of  pain. 

With  regard  to  the  employment  of  narcotics,  although  the  treat- 
ment may  be  commenced  with  the  hypodermatic  administration  of 
morphine,  it  is  advisable  to  give  opium  by  the  mouth  if  possible 
during  the  later  stages  of  the  disease.  Sometimes  the  frequency  of 
vomiting  not  only  precludes  the  administration  of  any  drug  by  the 
mouth,  but  may  even  be  violent  enough  to  call  for  the  use  of  nutrient 
enemata.  When,  however,  the  vomiting  is  not  so  severe,  \  or  |-grain 
doses  of  opium  may  be  given  in  pill  form  every  hour,  or  oftener  if 
employing  smaller  doses,  and  these  should  be  continued  until  there 
is  well-marked  relief  of  pain.  It  must  be  distinctly  remembered 
that  in  advising  the  frequent  use  of  opium  or  of  morj)hine,  I  am 
only  alluding  to  cases  where  the  acute  peritonitis  is  not  dependent 
upon  perforation. 


262  DIGESTION. 

In  perforative  cases,  as,  for  example,  in  those  due  to  appendicitis, 
it  is  undesirable  to  use  opium  to  this  extent,  since  subsequent  symp- 
toms may  be  thus  masked,  and  indications  for  operation  may  be 
concealed  until  the  case  has  become  almost  too  serious  for  operation. 
Another  objection  to  the  lavish  use  of  opium  is  that  it  greatly  de- 
presses the  secretions  of  the  intestine  and  impairs  its  contractile 
powers.  The  object  of  the  administration  of  opium  is  to  restrain 
excessive  peristaltic  movements,  and  thus  to  attack  the  cause  of  the 
pain,  as  well  as  to  influence  the  patient  beneficially  through  the 
nervous  system. 

One  further  word  of  warning  is  necessary  with  regard  to  the  em- 
ployment of  opium  or  of  morphine.  It  is  well  known  that,  with 
symptoms  of  chronic  kidney  disease,  there  is  some  risk  in  using 
these  drugs ;  hence,  whenever  the  cause  of  the  peritonitis  is  at  all 
obscure,  it  is  well  to  examine  the  urine  before  employing  opium 
freely,  since  there  is  always  the  possibility  that  the  peritonitis  may 
be  a  late  symptom  of  Bright's  disease.  In  cases  marked  with  high 
temperatures,  small  doses  of  quinine  may  be  combined  with  the  opium, 
and  during  their  employment  not  only  will  the  temperature  frequently 
fall,  but  the  pulse  may  improve  in  character. 

After  the  pain,  the  most  important  symptom  calling  for  treatment 
is  the  frequency  of  vomiting ;  vomiting  and  retching  may  often  be 
controlled  by  the  application  of  an  ice  bag  over  the  epigastrium,  and 
by  allowing  the  patient  to  suck  small  pieces  of  ice  repeatedly. 
Diluted  hydrocyanic  acid  may  sometimes  be  administered  alone, 
but  it  is  often  more  beneficial  if  given  with  an  effervescing  mix- 
ture. Its  sedative  action  may  be  increased  by  combination  with 
opium  ;  but  more  commonly,  when  vomiting  is  very  severe,  it  is  in- 
tensified by  the  nausea  which  frequently  follows  the  use  of  opiates. 
When,  in  spite  of  the  above  measures,  vomiting  persists,  it  will  be 
necessary  to  check  the  administration  of  drugs  or  of  food  by  the 
mouth,  and  for  forty-eight  hours  to  maintain  strength  by  nutrient 
enemata,  and  at  the  same  time  to  control  pain  by  the  repeated  use 
of  the  hypodermatic  syringe,  or  by  the  occasional  employment  of 
small  enemata  of  opium  or  morphine. 

It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  vomiting  often  depends  upon  fecal 
accumulations  in  the  lower  part  of  the  bowel ;  hence,  it  is  always 
desirable  to  use,  at  an  early  stage,  warm  soap-and-water  enemata  to 
clear  the  lower  bowel ;  indeed,  independently  of  the  vomiting,  the 
early  use  of  a  simple  enema  is  frequently  beneficial.     Although  it 


PERITONITIS.  263 

is  undesirable  to  promote  peristaltic  movement  of  the  upper  part  of 
the  intestine,  the  comfort  of  the  patient  may  be  greatly  increased 
by  the  occasional  use  of  enemata.  These  to  some  extent  serve  to 
relieve  constipation,  and  they  certainly  tend  to  remove  an  additional 
source  of  discomfort — namely,  the  accumulation  of  gas  within  the 
intestine.  It  was  at  one  time  recommended  that  the  constipation 
of  peritonitis  should  be  dealt  with  by  a  rather  large  single  dose  of 
magnesium  sulphate,  or  by  repeated  smaller  doses.  The  prospect 
of  thus  producing  increase  of  pain  appears  to  be  more  certain  than 
the  hypothetical  relief  of  pain  by  depletion  of  the  bloodvessels  and 
diminution  of  inflammation,  the  arguments  urged  in  favor  of  this 
practice.  As  a  whole,  it  appears  to  me  to  be  better  to  refrain  from 
using  salines  or  other  purgatives  until  the  peritonitis  has  consider- 
ably subsided. 

Another  form  of  treatment  less  open  to  objection,  though  perhaps 
not  very  frequently  employed  at  present,  consists  in  the  administra- 
tion of  small  doses  of  calomel.  If  this  drug  is  prescribed,  the  object 
of  its  employment  should  be  fully  realized — that  is  to  say,  it  is  to 
be  regarded  as  an  intestinal  antiseptic,  and  not  as  a  purgative.  If 
used  at  all  in  connection  with  peritonitis,  it  is  best  to  employ  it  fre- 
quently and  in  small  doses  in  conjunction  with  opium,  which  will 
tend  to  diminish  the  laxative  action  of  the  calomel ;  it  is,  on  the 
other  hand,  generally  bad  practice  to  push  the  employment  of  calomel 
to  the  production  of  liquid  stools.  Calomel  undoubtedly  can  control 
inflammation,  but  the  control  is  exerted  far  more  through  its  action 
as  an  antiseptic  than  through  its  influence  on  the  size  of  the  vessels 
of  the  intestine. 

It  has  been  already  mentioned  that  tympanites  is  frequent  in  peri- 
tonitis, and  when  this  symptom  causes  much  distress  it  may  be 
relieved  by  the  use  of  enemata  containing  turpentine,  and  by  the 
application  of  poultices  and  fomentations  containing  the  same  drug. 
In  many  cases  of  peritonitis  the  employment  of  the  ordinary  carmin- 
atives so  commonly  given  in  connection  with  purgatives  will  scarcely 
be  appropriate,  but  the  compound  tincture  of  camphor  occasionally 
gives  great  relief,  even  though  it  favors  constipation.  The  other 
measures  adapted  for  the  relief  of  tympanites,  as,  for  example,  the 
introduction  of  a  long,  flexible  tube,  or  the  puncturing  of  the  dis- 
tended intestine  through  the  abdominal  wall,  can  scarcely  be  adopted 
in  the  majority  of  the  cases  of  peritonitis,  since  the  distention  of  the  in- 
testine is  so  greatly  the  result  of  partial  paralysis  of  the  muscular  coat. 


264  DIGESTION. 

The  thirst  of  peritonitis  is  frequently  merely  the  thirst  of  the 
febrile  state,  and  it  is  accordingly  to  be  relieved  by  dilute  acid 
drinks,  or  by  the  use  of  ice ;  and  it  is  well  to  remind  the  patient 
and  the  nurse  that  this  symptom  can  be  controlled  better  by  fre- 
quent sipping  than  by  the  use  of  copious  draughts. 

With  regard  to  the  rapidity  of  respiration,  this  symptom  can 
rarely  be  dealt  with  satisfactorily  apart  from  the  general  treatment 
of  the  disease.  The  rapidity  of  respiration  is  often  suggestive  of 
some  form  of  lung  trouble,  bnt  on  auscultation  the  lungs  are  found 
to  be  clear,  or  at  most  to  have  but  a  few  loose  r§,les  at  the  bases ; 
the  symptom  is  an  indication  of  the  shallow  breathing  involuntarily 
adopted  by  the  patient  so  as  to  minimize  the  movements  of  the 
diaphragm.  Under  these  circumstances  discomfort  is  always  greatly 
increased  whenever  the  patient  is  persuaded  to  take  a  deep  breath, 
and  the  rapidity  of  respiration  is,  therefore,  to  be  regarded  as  a  con- 
servative process  with  which  it  is  undesirable  to  interfere. 

The  dietary  of  patients  with  peritonitis  must  be  modified  in  accord- 
ance with  the  symptoms.  It  has  already  been  indicated  that,  with 
frequent  uncontrollable  vomiting,  it  is  desirable  to  use  nutrient 
enemata  for  some  hours,  but  even  in  cases  uncomplicated  by  this 
symptom  the  dietary  of  the  patients  demands  consideration.  In- 
stinctively the  patient  refuses  to  take  much  food,  the  appetite  fails 
from  the  beginning  of  the  attack,  and  the  utmost  that  can  be  done 
is  to  administer  very  small  amounts  of  nutriment  in  liquid  form. 

As  in  other  forms  of  inflammatory  disease  connected  with  the 
peritoneum  or  with  the  intestine,  it  is  desirable  to  leave  the  intestine 
as  little  work  as  possible  to  perform ;  hence,  all  forms  of  vegetable 
fibre  must  be  rigidly  excluded  from  the  dietary,  though  farinaceous 
food  in  small  quantities  may  be  given  with  the  milk  and  eggs, 
which  should  form  the  principal  articles  of  nutriment.  The  dis- 
comfort of  thirst  may  be  relieved,  not  only  by  sucking  ice,  as  before 
mentioned,  but  also  by  allowing,  unless  the  case  is  very  severe, 
small  amounts  of  lukewarm  or  cold  tea.  It  is  necessary  to  be  care- 
ful about  the  temperature  at  which  this  is  taken,  since  if  the  tea  is 
too  hot  it  is  not  unlikely  to  provoke  vomiting,  or  it  may  at  least 
increase  the  rapidity  of  peristalsis.  During  the  day  small  quantities 
of  dilute  acid  drinks  may  be  sipped.  When  there  is  any  tendency 
to  vomiting,  iced  milk  may  be  given  in  doses  of  a  tablespoonf ul  or 
so,  and  the  tendency  may  be  further  allayed  by  a  mixture  of  milk 
with  an  equal  quantity  of  lime  water  or  of  any  effervescing  mineral 


PERITONITIS.  265 

water.  Small  quantities  of  beef -tea,  or  one  or  other  of  the  concen- 
trated meat  juices  so  frequently  recommended  to  the  medical  pro- 
fession, may  be  taken  with  comfort  when  milk  disagrees,  and  the 
administration  of  these  may  often  be  facilitated,  or  their  use  pro- 
longed, by  allowing  them  to  stand  in  ice  some  hours. 

During  convalescence  it  is  still  necessary  to  observe  great  caution, 
so  as  to  avoid  overloading  the  intestine  with  insoluble  material,  and 
it  is  advisable  to  lay  down  a  rule  that  everything  should  be  finely 
minced  and  even  reduced  to  a  semi-fluid  condition  by  being  pounded 
in  a  mortar.  All  solid  particles  which  might  present  any  difficulty 
of  digestion  should  be  carefully  removed.  Stimulants  are  not  always 
required ;  they  should,  as  a  rule,  be  reserved  for  cases  marked  by 
collapse,  which  is  shown  both  by  the  appearance  of  the  patient  and 
by  the  nature  of  the  pulse.  They  may  also  be  required  whenever 
convalescence  is  protracted,  since  under  these  circumstances  the 
patient  is  apt  to  be  weak,  partly  as  the  result  of  the  high  tempera- 
ture inseparable  from  his  condition,  and  partly  in  consequence  of 
the  strict  limitation  of  food  which  has  been  an  essential  part  of  the 
treatment.  When  used  to  avert  collapse,  good  brandy  diluted  with 
warm  water  is  perhaps  the  best  form  of  stimulant ;  but  if  the  col- 
lapse is  dependent  upon  frequent  vomiting,  some  form  of  effervescing 
stimulant  will  probably  be  preferred.  Good  sparkling  hock  or  cham- 
pagne will  often  be  found  to  be  of  great  service,  and,  as  with  other 
beverages  administered  by  the  mouth  in  cases  of  vomiting,  they  are 
usually  taken  better  when  previously  allowed  to  stand  in  ice. 

B.  Chronic  Peritonitis.  This  condition  deserves  separate  mention, 
although  the  treatment  in  many  respects  resembles  that  of  acute  peri- 
tonitis. It  is  necessary  to  ascertain  and  to  treat  the  cause  of  the  peri- 
tonitis. The  treatment,  however,  cannot  always  be  effected  as  readily 
as  in  the  acute  condition,  since  in  the  latter  it  is  often  possible,  in 
perforative  cases,  to  adopt  surgical  measures.  In  chronic  peritonitis, 
on  the  other  hand,  although  perhaps  dependent  upon  similar  causes, 
the  call  for  surgical  interference  is  less  imperative,  since  the  symp- 
toms may  develop  more  gradually,  though  they  still  may  indicate 
dangers  of  perforation  from  the  extension  of  inflammatory  processes 
due  to  ulcerations  in  the  stomach,  duodenum,  or  intestine.  Still, 
under  such  circumstances,  if  there  are  reasonable  grounds  for  believ- 
ing that  ulceration  is  present,  this  condition  should  be  treated  by 
appropriate  remedies.  Although  it  has  been  laid  down  as  a  general 
principle  that  efforts  should  be  made  to  effect  the  absorption  of 


266  DIGESTION. 

lymph  and  of  effused  fluid  in  chronic  peritonitis,  the  early  treat- 
ment should  not  be  unduly  energetic,  since  the  lymph  frequently 
affords  a  protective  covering  by  which  perforation  is  prevented.  It 
is  not  uncommon  to  find  the  walls  of  the  stomach  united  to  some 
adjacent  organ,  as  the  result  of  chronic  peritonitis,  and  under  these 
circumstances  rapid  absorption  of  effused  lymph  would  in  all  proba- 
bility have  led  to  the  urgent  symptoms  of  perforation. 

The  first  indication  is  the  employment  of  measures  to  relieve  pain ; 
but,  as  in  cases  of  appendicitis,  if  opium  is  employed  for  this  pur- 
pose, it  should  be  administered  only  in  frequently  repeated  small 
doses,  sufficient  to  soothe  without  being  absolutely  anodyne.  When 
pain  is  very  urgent,  it  will  be  necessary  to  employ  poultices,  as  in 
cases  of  acute  peritonitis ;  but  usually  the  pain  is  scarcely  suffi- 
ciently severe  to  call  for  repeated  poulticing,  and  can  be  controlled 
by  the  application  of  iodine  over  the  painful  site.  The  iodine  should 
be  repeated  daily  until  the  skin  begins  to  crack.  Occasionally  it  is 
beneficial  to  use  the  mercurial  ointment  over  the  tender  part.  Scott's 
dressing  may  also  be  applied  with  advantage.  In  chronic  cases  there 
is  frequently  effusion  of  fluid  into  the  peritoneal  cavity,  and  this 
effusion  may  require  to  be  dealt  with  by  surgical  measures  if  it  in- 
creases quickly  in  amount.  Before  withdrawing  the  fluid,  however 
it  is  well  to  use  continuous  efforts  to  promote  its  absorption  by 
counter-irritant  measures.  A  line  of  small  blisters  may  be  applied 
over  the  abdomen,  and  the  stimulation  they  afford  will  sometimes 
favor  the  disappearance  of  the  fluid.  It  has  often  been  recommended 
that  the  absorption  of  the  fluid  of  chronic  peritonitis  should  be  pro- 
moted by  diuretics  or  by  purgatives,  the  case  being  dealt  with  as 
though  it  were  one  of  chronic  effusion  comparable  with  that  which 
occurs  in  connection  with  chronic  renal  or  hepatic  disease.  Although 
these  measures  may  be  tried,  they  are  not  generally  attended  with 
success,  and  it  is  commonly  necessary,  sooner  or  later,  to  perform 
paracentesis. 

The  other  drugs  which  have  been  most  highly  recommended  to 
favor  the  reabsorption  of  this  chronic  effusion  are  the  non-official 
diuretin  and  apocynum  cannabinum.  A  tincture  of  the  latter  is 
official  in  the  United  States  Pharmacopoeia,  where  it  has  been  pre- 
scribed in  doses  of  from  5  to  60  minims.  It  is  credited  with  a 
powerful  diuretic  action,  and  it  has  been  used  not  only  in  the  dropsy 
of  Bright's  disease,  but  in  almost  every  condition  associated  with 
passive  effusion  into  serous  cavities. 


PERITONITIS.  267 

In  chronic  peritonitis  the  symptoms  are  not  always  sufficiently 
urgent  to  require  the  patient  to  be  kept  in  bed.  Sometimes,  indeed, 
after  patients  have  been  kept  in  bed  for  a  prolonged  period  with  but 
little  improvement,  much  benefit  will  ensue  from  a  change  of  air  and 
from  exercise  by  the  seaside.  Further,  in  these  chronic  cases,  when 
pain  is  not  very  severe,  it  is  quite  unnecessary  to  insist  on  any  rigid 
modification  of  diet.  The  diet  should  be  highly  nutritious,  and 
solids  may  be  given,  unless  the  peritonitis  is  dependent  upon  ulcera- 
tion of  the  stomach  or  of  the  intestine.  Indeed,  in  chronic  perito- 
nitis the  general  health  must  be  maintained  by  every  possible  means. 

There  are  certain  symptoms  of  chronic  peritonitis  which  may  re- 
quire separate  treatment,  as,  for  example,  constipation,  which  is  to 
be  dealt  with  by  enemata  and  by  mild  saline  purgatives.  Diarrhoea 
also  occasionally  occurs,  more  particularly  in  cases  associated  with 
intestinal  changes,  and  this  symptom  will  call  for  the  administration 
of  astringent  and  sedative  remedies,  small  doses  of  opium  being  fre- 
quently very  beneficial.  Both  with  constipation  and  diarrhoea,  and 
sometimes  independently  of  these  conditions,  tympanites  may  arise 
and  may  call  for  the  employment  of  carminatives  and  antispasmodics, 
as  already  described  under  the  heading  of  Tympanites. 

C  Tuberculous  peritonitis  is  an  affection  which  frequently  occurs 
in  early  life,  and  it  is  common  with  mesenteric  and  intestinal  disease 
in  tuberculous  children.  Osier  states  its  greatest  frequency  of  occur- 
rence to  be  between  the  ages  of  twenty  and  thirty,  and  gives  but  a 
small  percentage  under  the  age  of  ten  years.  It  is,  however,  a  con- 
dition which  one  has  frequent  opportunities  of  observing  in  a  chil- 
dren's hospital,  and  I  suspect  that  his  numbers  are  somewhat  mis- 
leading. Of  the  prominent  symptoms  in  connection  with  tubercu- 
lous peritonitis  the  distention  of  the  abdomen  is  perhaps  the  most 
striking.  This  distention  is  frequently  tympanitic,  and  in  early 
childhood  it  is  often  difficult  without  the  use  of  an  ansesthetic  to 
distinguish  the  distended  abdomen  of  tuberculous  peritonitis  from 
the  distention  of  chronic  rickets.  Sometimes  this  distention  is  asso- 
ciated with  a  fairly  large  effusion  of  fluid,  but  the  fluid  rarely  gives 
the  satisfactory  thrill  or  impulse  on  percussion,  and  its  presence  is 
to  be  recognized  more  by  dulness  and  by  a  peculiar  dough-like  sen- 
sation. Under  an  ansesthetic,  enlarged  glands  or  alterations  of 
the  omentum  may  be  recognized ;  the  enlarged  glands  may  form 
irregular  nodular  masses  which  are  generally  somewhat  deeply  situ- 
ated.    The  omental  tumor  more  commonly  forms  an  elongated  firm 


268  DIGESTION. 

mass,  which  may  lie  above  or  below  the  umbilicus.  Occasionally 
adhesions  will  form  between  the  separate  portions  of  the  intestine, 
and  will  lead  to  the  inclusion  of  fluid.  This  fluid  may  sometimes 
remain  clear,  but  it  frequently  becomes  opaque  and  even  purulent, 
and  the  purulent  collection  may  point  either  in  the  umbilical  region, 
or  in  one  of  the  iliac  fossse,  more  commonly  in  the  right. 

The  special  symptoms  connected  with  tuberculous  peritonitis  are 
those  due  to  the  presence  of  fluid  and  to  the  interference  of  the 
normal  function  of  the  intestine.  Pain  is  sometimes  complained  of, 
but  more  commonly  complaint  is  elicited  only  during  examination. 

The  treatment  of  tuberculous  peritonitis  has  recently  passed  largely 
into  the  hands  of  surgeons.  When  fluid  has  definitely  formed,  it  may 
be  relieved  by  free  abdominal  incision  and  drainage ;  even  when, 
during  operation,  the  intestines  are  found  to  be  firmly  matted  to- 
gether with  adhesions,  and  when  tubercles  have  been  seen  on  the 
peritoneal  surface,  the  case  is  by  no  means  helpless.  Short  of  sur- 
gical measures,  the  abdomen  may  be  covered  with  Scott's  dressing 
and  with  bandages  firmly  applied,  and  the  medicinal  treatment 
must  then  be  adapted  to  the  special  needs  of  the  individual.  Occa- 
sionally cases  of  tuberculous  peritonitis  are  associated  with  severe 
constipation,  the  intestine  appearing  to  lose  its  muscular  tone  in 
presence  of  the  inflammation  of  its  serous  covering.  Under  such 
circumstances  the  administration  of  purgatives  may  be  of  little 
avail,  and  the  fecal  accumulations  may  require  removal,  either  by 
enemata  or  by  digital  manipulation.  More  frequently,  however, 
diarrhoea  forms  a  prominent  symptom,  especially  when  the  peritoneal 
changes  are  connected  with  ulceration  in  the  course  of  the  intestine. 
For  the  relief  of  diarrhoea  the  ordinary  astringents  may  be  of  ser- 
vice ;  sometimes,  however,  it  is  necessary  to  relieve  the  diarrhoea 
of  tuberculous  peritonitis  by  the  use  of  opium  in  enemata,  and  even 
when  these  measures  have  failed,  I  have  occasionally  found  benefit 
result  from  the  administration  of  small  doses  of  alum,  in  conjunc- 
tion with  carminatives.  Five  grains  of  alum  may  be  given  to  a 
child  of  eight  to  twelve  years  of  age,  or  smaller  doses  of  2  or  3  grains 
may  be  given  at  first  for  a  few  days,  gradually  increasing  the  dose 
as  toleration  is  established. 

Tuberculous  peritonitis  is  not  necessarily  fatal.  Reabsorption  may 
occur  even  after  considerable  effusion,  and  the  glands  may  caseate 
and  undergo  further  degeneration.  I  have  frequently  met  with 
adults  who  have  given  me  a  history  of  undoubted  peritonitis  during 


ANIMAL  PARASITES  AFFECTING  THE  INTESTINE.      269 

their  childhood.  This  fortunate  result,  however,  cannot  always  be 
depended  upon,  though  it  sometimes  ensues  after  the  use  of  Scott's 
dressing.  Having  had  a  very  large  number  of  these  cases  under 
observation,  I  am  convinced  that  those  in  which  early  operations 
were  performed  did  better,  as  a  rule,  than  those  in  which  the  opera- 
tion was  delayed.  Some  surgeons  appear  to  wish  for  definite  indi- 
cations of  fluid,  or  even  for  definite  pointing  of  the  collection  of 
pus,  before  making  any  abdominal  incision ;  but  when  one  has  been 
able  to  have  an  operation  performed  early,  even  though  no  fluid  may 
have  been  removed  from  the  abdomen,  the  alteration  of  tension  often 
appears  to  be  followed  by  great  amelioration  in  the  general  symp- 
toms. 

Animal  Parasites  Affecting'  the  Intestine.  Three  chief  varie- 
ties of  intestinal  parasites  are  found  in  the  intestine — thread-worms, 
round-worms,  and  tape-worms.  Of  these  parasites  thread-worms 
are  by  far  the  commonest,  and  they  occur  most  frequently  in  young 
children,  although  they  have  been  known  to  affect  adults  also.  They 
are  especially  found  in  the  large  intestine,  but  they  may  occur  as  high 
as  the  jejunum,  and  they  are  often  very  numerous  in  the  neighbor- 
hood of  the  caecum.  They  migrate  from  this  site  toward  the  sig- 
moid flexure  and  the  rectum,  depositing  their  ova  in  the  rectum, 
where  they  produce  their  greatest  symptoms  of  irritation.  The 
symptoms  are  most  observable  at  night-time,  when  the  worms  may 
move  about  from  their  original  site,  may  make  their  appearance  ex- 
ternally, and  may  pass,  in  females,  into  the  vulva  or  the  vagina. 
They  may  cause  intense  irritation,  and  may  often  lay  the  founda- 
tion of  bad  habits.  For  their  removal  numerous  remedies  have 
been  employed,  and  although  the  adult  worm  is  sometimes  found 
high  up  in  the  intestine,  it  is  frequently  found  sufficient  to  destroy, 
and  to  effect  the  removal  of,  the  ova  and  the  worms  which  infest 
the  sigmoid  flexure  and  the  rectum.  This  is  generally  effected  by 
means  of  injections  into  the  rectum.  Of  the  numerous  substances 
recommended  for  injection,  that  most  commonly  employed  is  the 
infusion  of  quassia,  freshly  prepared.  When  dealing  with  children 
of  from  two  to  five  years  of  age,  the  amount  of  this  infusion  to  be 
used  should  be  at  least  a  small  teacupful,  for  some  four  or  five  nights 
in  succession.  Occasionally  it  is  well  to  commence  the  treatment 
with  a  simple  injection  of  salt  and  water,  two  teaspoonfuls  of  salt  to 
the  pint,  so  as  to  empty  the  rectum  of  its  contents.  This  simple 
saline  solution  may  occasionally  be  sufficient  without  the  employ- 


270  DIGESTION. 

ment  of  quassia,  or  any  of  the  numerous  other  remedies  that  have 
been  recommended  for  this  condition.  Speaking  generally,  the  value 
of  the  remedy  depends  far  more  upon  the  mode  of  its  employment 
than  upon  its  nature,  for  even  simple  soap  and  water  may  sometimes 
prove  efficacious,  if  it  is  injected  in  sufficient  quantity  to  wash  out 
not  only  the  rectum  and  the  sigmoid  flexure,  but  also  a  fairly  large 
proportion  of  the  large  intestine.  It  is  important  to  lay  stress  upon 
this  fact,  since  discouragement  frequently  ensues  when  attempts  have 
been  made  to  dislodge  thread-worms  by  small  injections.  Mothers 
and  nurses  are  prone  to  consider  that  a  large  injection  may  do  harm, 
and  undoubtedly,  if  introduced  in  bulk  with  great  rapidity,  an  injec- 
tion may  do  much  damage  ;  but  when  slowly  and  gently  introduced, 
and  when  the  position  of  the  patient  is  such  as  to  favor  the  upward 
movement  of  the  liquid,  it  is  possible,  without  causing  much  discom- 
fort, to  introduce  sufficient  liquid  to  reach  the  caecum.  In  general, 
it  is  not  necessary  to  use  so  much,  but  it  is  advisable  to  lay  stress 
upon  the  fact  that  success  is  more  likely  to  ensue  from  one  or  two 
large  injections  than  from  very  numerous  small  ones. 

Solutions  containing  tannin  are  sometimes  employed,  as,  for  ex- 
ample, dilute  preparations  of  cinchona,  while  the  unofficial  enema 
of  aloes  is  still  occasionally  prescribed.  Even  carbolic  acid,  in 
dilute  solution,  has  been  used  for  the  dislodgement  of  thread-worms. 
Whatever  substance  is  employed,  it  must  be  remembered  that  a 
dilute  solution  only  should  be  introduced,  as  otherwise  much  irrita- 
tion may  ensue.  Even  a  simple  enema  of  soap  and  water  may 
cause  not  only  irritation  of  the  rectum,  but  even  general  urticaria. 

When  thread-worms  persist  after  the  use  of  any  of  the  above 
enemata,  it  will  be  desirable  to  use  a  purgative  before  employing 
the  enema,  so  as  to  enable  the  full  force  of  the  enema  to  be  ex- 
pended upon  the  offending  parasites.  Should  these  measures  still 
prove  ineffectual,  it  is  probable  that  some  of  the  thread-worms  lie 
above  the  csecum,  and  it  then  becomes  necessary  to  use  either  san- 
tonin or  kamala  to  dislodge  them,  and  to  follow  the  employment  of 
these  remedies  by  a  purgative,  such  as  calomel ;  and  after  action 
has  resulted,  to  use  an  enema  of  quassia  or  of  salt. 

Hitherto  nothing  has  been  said  of  the  treatment  of  symptoms 
resulting  from  the  presence  of  thread-worms,  since  these  symptoms 
can  only  be  dealt  with  satisfactorily  by  the  removal  of  the  cause ; 
after  the  use,  however,  of  any  of  the  above  measures,  the  irritation 
and  the  restlessness  may  be  largely  controlled  by  local  applications 


ANIMAL  PARASITES  AFFECTING  THE  INTESTINE.      271 

and  by  sedative  measures.  Of  the  local  applications^  sedatives  like 
zinc  ointment,  especially  if  diluted  and  rendered  more  fluid  by  admix- 
ture with  fluid  petroleum,  will  often  give  relief,  while  aqueous  solu- 
tions of  carbolic  acid  (1  per  cent.)  will  sometimes  tend  to  prevent 
the  wanderings  of  thread-worms  from  the  rectum.  Should  the  fre- 
quent irritation  have  caused  disturbance  of  sleep,  with  dreaming  and 
perhaps  night  terrors,  small  doses  of  ammonium  bromide  may  tend 
to  check  the  habit  of  restlessness.  The  local  application  of  dilute 
solution  of  cocaine  hydrochlorate  has  been  recommended  and  may 
prove  comforting,  pending  the  employment  of  remedies  intended 
to  remove  the  thread-worms,  or  may  be  of  service  should  the  irri- 
tation continue  after  their  removal. 

Suppositories  of  carbolic  acid,  or  of  tannic  acid,  have  sometimes 
been  employed,  but  they  do  not,  as  a  rule,  suflice  to  cause  the  re- 
moval of  thread- worms  from  the  upper  part  of  the  rectum.  Some 
practitioners  are  in  favor  of  employing  in  every  case  of  thread- 
worms fairly  strong  purgatives  :  such  as,  for  example,  calomel,  scam- 
mony,  and  aloes.  As  already  indicated,  they  may  be  of  service  in 
troublesome  intractable  cases,  when  some  of  the  thread-worms  are 
situated  high  in  the  large  intestine,  or  when  they  have  even  reached 
the  small  intestine ;  but  happily  for  the  vast  majority  of  children, 
these  drugs,  which  may  produce  much  discomfort,  are  not  required. 
This  objection  does  not  hold  against  the  employment  of  small  doses 
of  rhubarb  frequently  repeated.  The  tincture  has  been  given  in 
doses  of  from  3  to  4  minims,  three  or  four  times  a  day,  in  conjunc- 
tion with  a  small  quantity  of  magnesium  carbonate  and  ginger,  and 
it  has  been  stated  that  these  will  sometimes  obviate  the  necessity  of 
enemata.  Very  commonly,  when  using  enemata  for  the  treatment 
of  thread-worms,  it  is  of  advantage  to  give  some  soluble  prepara- 
tion of  iron  together  with  infusion  of  quassia  by  the  mouth.  Iron 
and  ammonium  citrate  may  be  given  with  1  or  2  drachms  of  infu- 
sion of  quassia,  and  will  not  only  cause  improvement  of  appetite, 
but  will  tend  to  remove  the  pallor  from  which  these  children  so 
commonly  suffer.  Tonic  remedies  are,  as  a  rule,  always  indicated 
for  children  suffering  from  thread- worms. 

Next  to  the  thread-worm  in  point  of  frequency  stands  the  round- 
worm, which  may  occur  singly,  though  occasionally  two  or  more 
may  be  present  in  the  intestine.  The  existence  of  the  round-worm 
is  frequently  not  suspected  until  it  is  found  either  in  the  motions 
during  an  attack  of  diarrhoea  or  in  the  vomit  when  sickness  has 


272  DIGESTION. 

been  excited  by  its  presence  within  the  stomach.  The  appearance  of 
the  round-worm  is  so  well  known  that  it  does  not  call  for  detailed 
description.  The  symptoms  are  commonly  those  of  malnutrition, 
of  perverted  appetite,  of  restlessness,  irritability,  and  perhaps  of 
night  terrors,  or  grinding  of  the  teeth.  Picking  the  nose  is  some- 
times attributed  to  this  cause,  but  it  is  frequently  little  more  than 
a  habit  of  childhood. 

The  remedy  which  is  commonly  employed  for  this  condition  is 
santonin,  which  may  be  used  in  doses  of  from  1  to  3  grains  for  a 
child,  or  3  to  5  grains  for  an  adult,  mixed  with  sugar,  or  suspended 
with  mucilage,  or  made  into  a  lozenge.  When  using  santonin,  it  is 
desirable  to  follow  its  employment  with  a  purgative,  partly  with  the 
object  of  removing  the  dead  worm,  or  worms,  as  speedily  as  possible, 
and  partly  to  diminish  the  duration  of  the  disturbance  of  vision 
which  so  commonly  results  from  the  use  of  this  drug.  The  san- 
tonin should  always  be  given  at  night,  so  that  this  disturbance  of 
vision  should  be  as  little  noticeable  as  possible.  A  further  feature 
of  this  remedy  is  a  tendency  to  alter  the  color  of  the  urine,  which 
may  become  a  deep  orange  color,  and  this  color  may  be  increased 
almost  to  redness  on  coming  into  contact  with  clothes  impregnated 
with  alkalies.  It  is  advisable  to  call  attention  to  the  probability  of 
this  change,  since  otherwise  the  red  appearance  may  be  mistaken  for 
hsematuria  and  cause  needless  alarm. 

Before  giving  santonin,  it  is  advisable  to  insure  comparative 
emptiness  of  the  alimentary  canal,  partly  by  diminishing  the  amount 
of  food  for  two  or  three  days  and  keeping  the  child  upon  a  liquid 
diet,  and  partly  by  the  use  of  a  dose  of  castor  oil  shortly  before  the 
administration  of  santonin,  and  again  a  few  hours  later.  It  will 
generally  be  advisable  to  repeat  the  santonin  on  two  or  three  occa- 
sions, even  though  no  obvious  result  may  ensue  from  the  first  doses 
employed.  It  must,  however,  be  remembered  that  with  santonin 
there  is  some  danger  in  the  use  of  overdoses ;  for  even  in  medicinal 
doses  it  may  produce  headache  and  slight  dizziness,  while  in  over- 
doses it  has  occasionally  caused  vomiting,  giddiness,  and  even  con- 
vulsions. Several  other  remedies  have  been  recommended  for  use 
against  the  ascaris  lumbricoides,  as,  for  example,  kamala,  kousso, 
mucuna,  sigelia,  turpentine,  etc. ;  but  these  are  seldom  necessary, 
since  santonin  so  very  rarely  fails,  and  most  of  these  drugs  possess 
special  inconveniences,  or  dangers  :  thus  turpentine  may  produce 
toxic  symptoms,  while  kamala  and  kousso  require  to  be  used  in 


ANIMAL  PARASITES  AFFECTING  THE  INTESTINE.      273 

large  doses,  and  the  infusion  of  kousso,  in  particular,  is  difficult  to 
administer  to  a  child. 

Considering  the  enormous  length  which  tape-worms  may  some- 
times attain,  it  is  extremely  curious  to  note  the  frequency  with 
which  their  presence  either  is  not  marked  by  symptoms  of  any 
kind,  or  is  associated  with  symptoms  of  an  indefinite  tyjDe  which 
may  be  referred  to  various  functional  derangements  of  the  digestive 
organs.  Very  often  the  existence  of  tape-worms  may  not  be  sus- 
pected until  some  of  the  mature  segments  appear  with  the  feces. 
Sometimes,  however,  it  is  found  that  their  presence  is  associated 
with  some  disturbance  of  nutrition,  or  with  some  disproportion  be- 
tween the  appetite  of  the  patient  and  the  nourishment  he  derives 
from  his  food.  Frequently  the  hunger  may  be  excessive,  and  may 
be  accompanied  by  discomfort,  which  is  relieved  after  food  has  been 
taken.  Occasionally  there  may  be  feelings  of  distention,  or  of  colic, 
which  may  be  referred  to  other  causes.  These  anomalous  sensations 
are,  however,  often  at  their  worst  during  fasting,  and  are  relieved 
after  a  full  meal.  In  exceptional  cases  the  action  of  the  bowel  may 
be  irregular,  attacks  of  constipation  alternating  with  some  diarrhoea. 
Reflex  symptoms,  such  as  irritation  about  the  anus  and  nose,  may 
be  noted,  but  they  are  less  frequent  than  with  thread- worms.  Palpi- 
tation may  be  complained  of,  especially  when  there  is  much  disten- 
tion, and  the  presence  of  tape-worms  may  eve"h  give  rise  to  reflex 
nervous  symptoms,  such  as  cramp,  or  choreic  movements.  Many 
of  these  symptoms  may  be  observed  for  a  length  of  time  before  the 
truth  is  discovered ;  indeed,  they  are  so  frequently  due  to  simpler 
causes,  that,  as  above  indicated,  the  existence  of  a  tape-worm  is  per- 
haps never  suspected  until  some  segments  are  found. 

Should  there  be  any  suspicion  that  these  symptoms  are  due  to  the 
presence  of  a  tape-worm,  the  administration  of  a  brisk  purgative 
may  serve  to  establish  the  diagnosis  by  hastening  the  detachment  of 
some  of  the  segments.  Before  undertaking  the  treatment  of  tape- 
worm, it  is  necessary  to  remember  that  the  case  cannot  be  considered 
to  be  cured  until  the  first  portion,  or  the  so-called  head,  has  been 
removed,  since,  if  this  attached  portion  retains  its  vitality,  it  is 
capable  of  developing  a  further  length  of  tape-worm.  To  effect 
the  expulsion  of  the  head  is  therefore  essential  to  success.  Numer- 
ous so-called  vermicides  or  vermifuges  may  succeed  in  bringing 
away  great  lengths  of  segments,  and  yet  after  a  time  it  will  be 
found  that  the  patient  has  not  been  cured,  since  the  head  has  not 

18 


274  DIGESTION. 

been  removed.  The  first  segment  is  commonly  somewhat  deeply 
embedded  in  an  accumulation  of  mucus  and  other  materials  sur- 
rounding the  point  of  attachment  to  the  mucous  membrane,  and  it 
is  essential,  therefore,  to  submit  the  patient  to  a  form  of  preparatory 
treatment  to  remove  this  mucus  and  to  enable  the  vermicide  or 
vermifuge  to  act  primarily  on  this  point  of  attachment.  This  pre- 
paratory treatment  consists  in  the  use  of  purgatives,  by  means  of 
which  the  contents  of  the  bowel  may  be  thoroughly  evacuated.  The 
various  salines,  or  one  or  other  of  the  purgative  mineral  waters,  may 
be  of  great  use  in  thus  clearing  the  way  for  the  administration  of 
the  anthelmintic.  These  purgatives  should  be  administered  for 
three  or  four  days  before  the  use  of  the  anthelmintic,  and  during 
this  time  it  is  advisable  to  keep  the  patient  upon  a  restricted  diet, 
of  which  milk  and  bread  should  form  the  principal  constituents. 
When  these  disagree,  or  when  they  appear  insufficient  for  the  needs 
of  the  individual,  they  may  be  supplemented  by  various  kinds  of 
concentrated  soups,  and  by  rice  or  other  farinaceous  puddings. 

There  is  a  curious  idea  among  the  public  that  in  cases  of  tape- 
worm, salt  meat  and  salt  fish  are  beneficial,  and  no  doubt,  to  some 
extent,  this  opinion  is  based  upon  the  influence  of  salt  in  increasing 
the  fluid  character  of  the  intestinal  mucus.  They  may,  therefore, 
be  given  in  moderation,  but  it  is  perhaps  more  scientific  to  employ 
chlorides,  such  as  amtnonium  chloride  or  sodium  chloride,  to  diminish 
the  tenacious,  character  of  the  intestinal  secretions.  Some  of  the 
mineral  waters  are  rich  in  chlorides,  and  if  these  have  been  used  as 
purgatives,  there  will  be  no  need  for  the  separate  administration  of 
other  chlorides  ;  but  should  magnesium  sulphate  or  sodium  sulphate 
or  phosphate  be  used  as  a  saline,  ammonium  chloride  may  also  be 
given  in  doses  of  from  10  grains  and  upward,  three  or  four  times 
during  the  day. 

Before  undertaking  this  preparatory  treatment  it  will  be  well  to 
inquire  into  the  general  power  of  the  digestion,  since  if  this  is  much 
disordered,  there  will  be  great  probability  that  the  anthelmintic  may 
be  rejected  by  vomiting.  When  there  is  evidence  of  gastritis,  this 
may  be  appropriately  treated  with  mineral  acids,  with  small  doses 
of  pepsin,  or  with  vegetable  tonics,  such  as  quinine  or  quassia,  and 
it  may  be  advisable  to  defer  the  above -described  employment  of 
purgatives  until  the  digestive  system  is  in  better  working  order. 
It  must  not  be  forgotten,  however,  that  to  a  great  extent  the  diges- 
tive powers  are  dependent  upon  the  free  action  of  the  bowels,  and. 


ANIMAL  PARASITES  AFFECTING  THE  INTESTINE.      275 

therefore,  during  the  administration  of  these  digestive  tonics,  it  may 
be  necessary  to  employ  a  mild  saline  purgative  occasionally,  even 
though  the  free  administration  of  salines  and  the  use  of  the  anthel- 
mintic may  be  deferred.  When  the  intestine  has  thus  been  prepared, 
it  is  advisable  to  allow  no  food  to  be  taken  after  the  midday  meal  of 
the  day  preceding  that  upon  which  the  anthelmintic  is  to  be  used, 
and  it  is  often  recommended  that  a  tablespoonf ul  of  castor  oil  should 
be  taken  at  bedtime  to  completely  empty  the  bowel. 

The  anthelmintic  that  is  most  commonly  employed  is  the  oleoresin 
of  male  fern.  This  should  be  used  in  doses  of  from  30  to  60  min- 
ims, according  to  the  age  of  the  patient.  It  is  sometimes  recom- 
mended that,  on  account  of  its  nauseous  taste,  the  oleoresin  should 
be  given  in  capsules  ;  but  frequently  it  is  given  in  an  emulsion  with 
mucilage  or  with  tragacanth  powder,  made  up  with  peppermint 
water.  I  have  found  that  to  some  extent  the  tendency  to  vomiting 
depends  upon  the  degree  of  concentration  of  this  mixture,  and  that 
when  drachm  doses  of  oleoresin  of  male  fern  are  given  in  a  mixture 
made  up  to  one  ounce,  it  is  frequently  rejected,  while  the  same  dose, 
when  further  diluted,  may  be  tolerated.  The  tendency  to  vomiting 
forms  the  chief  obstacle  to  the  satisfactory  treatment  with  male  fern, 
and  patients  differ  greatly  in  the  way  in  which  this  tendency  may 
be  overcome.  Some  prefer  taking  the  nauseous  draught  at  a  single 
dose,  while  others  prefer  taking  it  in  divided  doses,  at  intervals  of 
ten  or  fifteen  minutes.  When  either  of  these  expedients  fails,  the 
nausea  may  be  diminished  either  by  the  use  of  small  doses  of  ammo- 
nium or  potassium  bromide,  or  by  advising  the  patient  to  lie  down 
for  an  hour  or  so  after  the  dose  has  been  taken.  It  has  even  been 
found  possible  to  facilitate  the  retention  of  the  dose  by  giving  it  at 
a  very  early  hour  in  the  morning,  and  encouraging  the  patient  to 
attempt  to  sleep  for  some  time  after  it  has  been  taken. 

Should  no  action  of  the  bowels  follow  within  a  couple  of  hours 
after  the  administration  of  the  anthelmintic,  it  will  be  well  to  give 
a  laxative,  such  as  a  dose  of  an  ounce  of  compound  tincture  of  jalap 
of  the  National  Formulary.  When  the  bowels  act,  the  patient  should 
be  seated  over  a  pan  containing  water,  and  everything  passed  should 
be  carefully  preserved  for  examination.  Diligent  search  for  the  head 
must  be  made,  since,  unless  this  is  discovered,  there  is  no  guarantee 
that  the  symptoms  will  not  return.  Should  it  not  be  found,  it  will 
be  advisable  to  repeat  the  dose  of  male  fern  after  an  interval  of 
a  week  or  two,  adopting  the  same  precautions  previously  and  sub- 


276  DIGESTION. 

sequently  to  its  use.  In  dealing  with  private  patients,  this  second 
administration  under  the  above  circumstances  is  almost  absolutely 
necessary,  since  the  conditions  are  so  favorable  for  thorough  exam- 
ination of  the  results  of  the  action  of  the  drug,  and  there  is,  there- 
fore, very  little  chance  of  the  head  escaping  detection.  With  out- 
patients at  a  hospital,  however,  it  is  frequently  difficult  to  feel  sure 
that  due  care  has  been  taken  in  collecting  the  whole  of  the  action, 
and  it  is  also  difficult  to  induce  the  hospital  patient  to  undergo  a 
second  time  an  unpleasant  course  of  treatment  for  which  he  fails  to 
see  the  immediate  necessity. 

The  treatment  with  male  fern  has  been  described  in  detail,  since, 
when  employed  with  these  precautions,  it  very  rarely  fails  to  be 
efficient ;  but  it  is  well  to  mention  that  numerous  other  anthelmin- 
tics have  been  recommended.  Some  have  been  employed  on  account 
of  the  real  or  supposed  difficulty  in  the  administration  of  a  sufficient 
dose  of  male  fern.  Oil  of  turpentine  has  been  mentioned,  and  in 
its  favor  it  has  been  urged  that  it  is  unnecessary  to  employ  purga- 
tives after  its  use ;  but  oil  of  turpentine  is  almost  as  difficult  to 
administer  in  large  doses  as  male  fern,  and  it  is  not  altogether 
devoid  of  risk,  especially  when  small  doses  of  the  oil  are  given, 
since  if  it  fails  to  produce  purgation,  it  may  be  quickly  absorbed 
and  may  give  rise  to  considerable  renal  irritation  during  elimina- 
tion. It  may  be  employed  in  doses  of  3  to  4  fluidrachms  or  more, 
either  in  the  form  of  capsules,  or  made  up  into  a  mixture  with  olive 
oil  and  with  yolk  of  egg,  or  with  tincture  of  quillaia.  Kousso  is 
another  remedy  that  is  sometimes  used.  Formerly  there  was  an 
infusion  of  kousso  in  the  Pharmacopoeia,  and  it  was  recommended 
^:hat  it  should  be  made  as  required  and  given  without  being  strained, 
in  doses  of  from  4  to  6  ounces.  A  quarter  to  half  an  ounce  should 
Ibe  infused  in  4  to  5  ounces  of  boiling  water,  and  the  whole  should 
be  taken  as  a  draught  after  it  has  been  allowed  to  cool.  Like  male 
fern,  kousso  is  apt  to  produce  nausea  and  vomiting,  and  it  is  very 
rarely  employed  in  this  country. 

In  America  pomegranate  root  appears  to  be  greatly  in  favor,  and 
this  may  be  given  as  an  infusion  of  the  bark,  3  ounces  being  macer- 
ated in  10  ounces  of  water  and  then  reduced  to  one-half  by  evapo- 
ration. It  may  also  be  used  as  the  decoction  of  pomegranate  bark 
in  doses  of  J  to  2  iluidounces.  Recently  the  active  alkaloid  of 
pomegranate — pelletierine — has  been  employed,  and  it  is  stated  that 
its  use  is  not  followed  by  any  general  symptoms,  except  a  slight 


HYDATIDS  OF  THE  LIVER.  277 

feeling  of  giddiness,  though  occasionally  it  may  excite  nausea  and 
vomiting.  Pelletierine  is  given  either  as  the  sulphate  or  the  tan- 
nate,  in  doses  of  J  to  1  grain,  after  the  same  preparatory  treatment 
already  indicated.  When  it  fails  to  purge  within  two  or  three 
hours,  castor  oil  or  some  other  purgative  should  be  employed.  Pel- 
letierine has  the  disadvantage  of  being  somewhat  expensive,  and 
it  has  scarcely  yet  found  favor  with  English  practitioners. 

Kamala  has  been  much  employed  in  Eastern  countries  as  an 
anthelmintic ;  it  is  commonly  administered  in  doses  of  from  1  to  2 
drachms,  every  three  hours,  mixed  with  syrup.  This  drug  is  stated 
to  cause  less  nausea  than  any  of  the  foregoing,  but  it  has  the  disad- 
vantage of  requiring  the  subsequent  administration  of  a  purgative. 
It  is  a  drug  which  may  be  employed  in  troublesome  cases  when  other 
remedies  have  failed,  but  it  must  be  given  under  the  same  conditions, 
and  there  is  very  little  evidence  that  it  possesses  any  powers  supe- 
rior to  those  of  male  fern. 

Pumpkin  seeds  have  been  recommended  for  children.  Osier  states 
that  for  adults  3  or  4  ounces  should  be  carefully  bruised,  then  macer- 
ated for  twelve  or  fourteen  hours,  and  the  entire  quantity  taken,  fol- 
lowed in  an  hour  by  a  purgative.  For  children,  however,  the  dose 
should  be  much  smaller ;  1  ounce  of  powdered  seeds,  prepared  in 
the  same  way,  or  given  with  syrup,  is  generally  considered  to  be 
sufficient.  Although  it  is  stated  that  this  remedy  is  well  taken,  the 
large  dose  is  a  disadvantage,  and  it  may  occasionally  produce  some 
nausea. 

It  has  been  stated  that  anaesthetics  have  been  successfully  used  to 
produce  loosening  of  the  attachment  of  the  tape-worm,  and  that  the 
removal  may  then  be  facilitated  by  a  brisk  purgative.  It  is  said 
that  this  method  has  been  successful  when  all  other  remedies  had 
failed. 

With  regard  to  the  foregoing  fairly  long  list  of  anthelmintics,  it 
is  probable  that  the  selection  of  the  remedy  will  to  some  extent  be 
influenced  by  the  residence  of  the  patient ;  thus,  in  Eastern  countries 
it  is  perhaps  easier  to  obtain  kousso  or  kamala  of  sufficient  powers, 
but  in  this  country  male  fern  can  nearly  always  be  trusted  to  pro- 
duce the  desired  result,  if  given  under  appropriate  conditions. 

Hydatids  of  the  Liver.  Hydatids  of  the  liver  depend  upon  one 
stage  in  the  development  of  the  taenia  echinococcus — the  tape-worm 
of  the  dog.  When  the  embryo  reaches  the  liver  of  the  human  being 
it  is  gradually  converted  into  a  small  cyst,  consisting  of  two  layers, 


278  DIGESTION. 

a  true  capsule  and  an  inner  granular  layer.  The  cyst  speedily  in- 
creases in  size,  and  a  fibrous  covering  is  developed.  The  primary 
cyst  frequently  contains  numerous  smaller  cysts,  and  the  disease 
makes  itself  apparent  by  subsequent  changes  occurring  in  these 
various  cysts — changes  that  sometimes  lead  to  suppuration  and  occa- 
sionally to  rupture.  On  the  other  hand,  sometimes  the  echinococcus 
dies,  and  the  contents  of  the  cyst  are  to  a  large  extent  absorbed, 
leaving  merely  a  mass  containing  a  putty-like  material,  which  may 
become  somewhat  calcareous. 

The  symptoms  of  hydatids  of  the  liver  are  often  extremely  vague, 
amounting  only  to  the  presence  of  a  globular,  painless  tumor,  through 
which  the  characteristic  fremitus  or  thrill  may  often  be  felt. 

It  is  perhaps  unnecessary  to  deal  here  with  the  treatment  of  this 
condition  at  any  great  length,  since  although  various  drugs,  such  as 
potassium  iodide  or  sodium  chloride,  have  been  recommended,  they 
do  not  appear  to  influence  the  size  of  the  cyst  or  the  vitality  of  the 
echinococcus,  and  the  treatment,  therefore,  is  almost  entirely  surgical. 

When  suppurative  changes  have  occurred,  the  symptoms  are  more 
definite.  Frequently  there  is  some  degree  of  jaundice,  and  the  tumor 
becomes  tender,  owing  to  the  inflammation  in  the  surrounding 
tissues.  The  course  of  the  disease  will  also  be  marked  by  oscilla- 
tions of  temperature,  by  rigors,  and  by  considerable  emaciation. 
These  febrile  symptoms  will  call  for  special  treatment,  such  as  the 
administration  of  quinine,  or  of  acetanilid,  and  Avill  indicate  the 
necessity  for  a  nourishing  diet,  but  they  render  surgical  interference 
more  imperative.  It  is  not  necessary  to  attempt  to  describe  the  sur- 
gical treatment  in  detail.  It  will  perhaps  be  sufficient  to  indicate 
that  it  is  actuated  by  two  main  objects  :  the  first,  to  secure  the 
death  of  the  echinococcus,  and  thus  to  check  further  growth  of  the 
cyst ;  the  second,  to  remove  the  cyst  and  its  contents,  this  course 
being  generally  adopted  when  suppurative  changes  have  occurred. 
To  secure  the  death  of  the  echinococcus,  the  cyst  has  been  punc- 
tured, either  with  or  without  removal  of  fluid.  The  removal  of 
even  a  small  amount  of  fluid  is  sometimes  followed  by  an  arrest  of 
growth  and  by  subsequent  rapid  diminution  in  the  size  of  the  tumor  ; 
occasionally,  however,  the  cyst  is  freely  incised  and  evacuated. 

At  one  time  various  injections  into  the  cyst  were  made  through  a 
trocar,  with  the  view  of  arresting  vitality  ;  but  these  injections  have 
so  frequently  been  followed  by  indications  of  suppuration  that  at  the 
present  time  they  are  very  rarely  performed. 


TRICHINOSIS.  279 

Trichinosis.  This  disease  depends  upon  the  development  of  the 
trichina  spiralis.  The  trichina  occupies  the  small  intestine,  and  may 
give  rise  to  symptoms  of  gastro-intestinal  disturbance,  while  the 
embryos  subsequently  pass  from  the  intestine  to  the  voluntary 
muscles,  and  there  become  encapsulated. 

The  disease  is  conveyed  through  eating  infected  pork,  and  the 
danger  is,  therefore,  only  to  be  averted  through  thorough  cooking, 
by  which  the  temperature  of  every  part  is  raised  to  the  boiling- 
point.  Raw  ham  and  imperfectly  smoked  sausages  are  extremely 
likely  to  cause  this  disease. 

A  few  days  after  infected  meat  has  been  taken  there  will  probably 
be  developed  gastro-intestinal  symptoms,  consisting  of  abdominal 
pain,  anorexia,  vomiting,  and  perhaps  diarrhoea.  To  these  symp- 
toms some  rise  of  temperature  is  occasionally  added,  but  the  fever 
is  frequently  of  an  intermittent  type.  The  rise  of  temperature, 
however,  indicates,  as  a  rule,  the  stage  of  general  infection,  and  is 
accompanied  by  tenderness  and  perhaps  swelling  of  various  muscles. 

The  only  treatment  that  is  possible  in  this  disease  is  one  which 
secures  the  speedy  removal  of  the  infected  meat  so  soon  as  the  ear- 
liest symptoms  have  been  declared.  With  this  object,  emetics  and 
purgatives  of  prompt  action  should  be  used  ;  and  even  when  severe 
diarrhoea  is  present  no  efforts  should  be  made  to  check  its  frequency, 
although  supporting  measures,  such  as  the  administration  of  stimu- 
lants, of  milk  and  strong  beef-tea,  will  be  desirable. 

For  the  relief  of  febrile  symptoms,  acetanilid  and  antipyrine  are 
sometimes  serviceable,  and  the  free  use  of  stimulants  will  also  be 
desirable ;  but  we  are  at  present  unacquainted  with  any  form  of 
medicinal  treatment  which  will  influence  the  development  of  the 
embryos  after  they  have  reached  the  muscles.  Gymnastic  exercises, 
Turkish  baths,  and  massage  may  be  used,  but  the  benefit  to  be  de- 
rived fom  these  measures  is  somewhat  problematical. 


CHAPTER    XII. 


HEPATIC  DISEASES. 


Gi-allstones — Hepatic  Colic — Acute  Obstructive  Jaundice — Chronic  Obstructive 
Jaundice — Icterus  Neonatorum — Congestion  of  the  Liver. 

Gallstones.  The  symptoms  produced  by  gallstones  call  for  treat- 
ment under  two  conditions  :  when  dislodged  from  the  gall-bladder 
and  attempting  to  make  their  way  to  the  intestine,  they  commonly 
give  rise  to  very  marked  acute  symptoms,  with  urgent  need  for 
treatment;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  in  the  intervals  between  the 
attacks  of  biliary  colic,  it  will  be  desirable  to  adopt  measures  to 
facilitate  the  removal  of  gallstones,  and  to  diminish  the  tendency 
to  their  formation.  The  conditions  under  which  gallstones  arise 
have  not  been  determined  with  any  accuracy.  They  are  more  com- 
mon among  women  than  among  men,  but  it  is  not  certain  whether 
this  fact  is  due  to  a  sedentary  life,  or  to  the  possible  interference 
with  the  functions  of  the  liver  by  clothing  or  by  diet.  An  increased 
formation  of  cholesterin  has  been  attributed  to  nervous  influence,  but 
gallstones  arise  commonly  under  conditions  where  this  element  can 
be  eliminated.  Recurrent  attacks  of  catarrh  of  the  bile-ducts  may 
perhaps  predispose  to  the  formation  of  gallstones  by  affording  plugs 
of  mucus  or  masses  of  epithelium,  which  may  serve  as  the  nucleus 
around  which  cholesterin  and  other  bile  solids  may  be  deposited. 
The  prolonged  retention  of  bile  within  the  gall-bladder  may  per- 
haps increase  the  tendency  to  deposition  of  cholesterin,  and  such 
retention  may  occur  when  meals  are  taken  at  very  long  intervals. 

Gallstones  may  be  very  numerous  and  small,  consisting  of  gran- 
ular masses,  or,  when  of  larger  size,  they  may  have  facets  and  be 
somewhat  angular,  owing  to  friction  and  pressure  within  the  gall- 
bladder ;  but  sometimes  they  may  be  much  larger,  and  occasionally 
the  whole  of  the  gall-bladder  is  found  to  be  occupied  by  a  single 
calculus.  Symptoms  of  colic  are  usually  produced  whenever  frag- 
ments or  concretions  pass  along  the  duct  toward  the  intestine.  The 
extent  of  colic  will  greatly  depend  upon  the  size  of  the  gallstone 
and  upon  the  consequent  difficulty  it  has  in  passing  along  the  duct. 


GALLSTONES.  281 

Doubtless,  after  one  fairly  large  concretion  has  passed  through  the 
common  duct,  others  of  smaller  size  may  make  their  escape  without 
inducing  much  pain.  Ordinarily,  however,  the  duct  contracts  dur- 
ing the  passage  of  a  calculus,  and  the  contraction  causes  pain  of  an 
excruciating  character.  This  pain  may  start  in  the  region  of  the 
gall-bladder  and  may  radiate  thence  toward  the  spine  and  toward 
the  right  shoulder,  though  sometimes  the  pain  is  referred  to  the 
umbilical  region.  During  the  pain,  numerous  reflex  phenomena 
are  to  be  noted  ;  frequently  there  is  considerable  restlessness  and 
uneasiness,  and  very  often  the  pain  may  be  sufficiently  severe  to 
excite  vomiting  of  a  reflex  character.  The  pulse  is  commonly  small, 
and  the  depression  of  the  circulation  is  further  evidenced  by  pallor 
and  by  cold,  clammy  perspiration.  When  the  pain  is  very  severe, 
rigors  may  occur,  with  the  usual  rise  of  temperature  to  103°  or 
more.  Almost  from  the  commencement  of  the  seizure  the  abdom- 
inal walls  become  rigid,  so  that  it  is  difficult  to  determine  the  posi- 
tion or  the  size  of  the  gall-bladder,  while  the  size  of  the  liver  is 
only  to  be  inferred  from  percussion. 

Sometimes  the  liver  is  increased  in  size,  and  there  is  always  ten- 
derness over  the  hepatic  region.  The  pain  frequently  continues  for 
three  hours  or  more,  when  the  acute  character  may  to  a  great  extent 
disappear  if  the  gallstone  has  found  its  way  into  the  duodenum,  or 
been  returned  to  the  gall-bladder.  This  sudden  relief  of  pain  is, 
however,  merely  a  relief  of  degree,  since  much  tenderness  and  sore- 
ness are  usually  still  felt  in  the  hepatic  region.  Some  cases  of  gall- 
stone are  followed  by  jaundice,  which  is  dependent  upon  the  block- 
age of  the  common  bile  duct  and  the  reabsorption  of  bile.  The 
probable  occurrence  of  jaundice  varies  with  the  time  that  the  gall- 
stone remains  in  the  common  bile-duct. 

Occasionally,  when  it  is  rapidly  passed  onward,  there  may  be  no 
jaundice,  while  on  the  other  hand,  the  jaundice  is  liable  to  become 
very  intense  if  the  calculus  is  arrested  at  the  duodenal  orifice.  When 
the  attack  has  been  of  short  duration,  it  may  not  be  followed  by  any 
symptom  of  importance,  but  frequently,  when  jaundice  occurs,  it  is 
associated  with  the  passage  of  dark  bile-stained  urine  and  with 
nausea  and  a  tendency  to  vomiting. 

From  the  above  brief  account  of  the  symptoms  noticed  during 
the  passage  of  a  gallstone,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  prominent  symp- 
toms calling  for  treatment  are  pain,  due  to  the  irritation  of  the  cal- 
culus and  the  spasmodic  contractions  of  involuntary  muscle,  and 


282  HEPATIC  DISEASES. 

vomiting,  which  is  ordinarily  of  a  reflex  character.  Jaundice  may 
or  may  not  be  present,  and  during  the  attack  of  biliary  colic  it 
will  not  call  for  any  particular  treatment.  Practically,  therefore, 
the  measures  for  relief  are  narrowed  down  to  those  which  will 
either  allay  pain  or  cause  relaxation  of  muscular  spasm,  and,  hap- 
pily, both  objects  can  commonly  be  attained  by  the  same  treatment. 

Morphine  is  naturally  the  first  remedy  to  be  thought  of  during 
biliary  colic,  and  it  may  either  be  employed  hypodermatically,  or  it 
may  be  given  by  the  mouth  when  the  pain  is  not  attended  by  vom- 
iting. There  is  distinct  advantage  in  its  administration  by  the 
mouth,  if  it  can  be  retained,  since,  although  during  its  absorption 
from  the  stomach  some  of  it  is  carried  through  the  portal  system  to 
the  liver,  part  escapes  absorption  in  the  stomach  and  is  passed 
onward  to  the  duodenum,  where  it  may  cause  relaxation  of  the 
orifice  of  the  common  bile-duct.  When  given  by  the  mouth  it 
should  be  combined  with  diluted  hydrocyanic  acid,  or  it  may  even 
be  given  in  an  effervescing  draught ;  in  either  of  these  forms  it 
appears  to  be  less  likely  to  be  rejected  by  vomiting.  Pending  the 
preparation  of  these  mixtures,  the  pain  from  which  the  patient  is 
suffering  is  so  urgent  that  it  is  commonly  desirable  to  administer 
morphine  hypodermatically,  and  to  adopt  other  measures  for  reliev- 
ing pain  and  spasm,  such  as  the  application  of  hot  fomentations 
over  the  region  of  the  liver,  or  the  use  of  a  bath  at  the  highest  tem- 
perature that  can  be  tolerated. 

When  there  is  frequent  vomiting,  the  hypodermatic  use  of  mor- 
phine must  be  continued,  and  when  used  repeatedly  for  some  hours  it 
is  advisable  to  administer  atropine  sulphate  with  morphine.  Atropine 
sulphate  may  be  used  in  doses  of  from  2^0"  gi'^iii  ^^  rio"  grain.  Most 
practitioners,  however,  who  carry  hypodermatic  syringes,  are  supplied 
with  tablets  of  atropine  sulphate  and  of  morphine  acetate  or  tartrate 
in  appropriate  proportion  for  simultaneous  administration.  The 
morphine  tartrate  may  be  given  in  doses  of  from  |^  to  |  grain  accord- 
ing to  the  severity  of  the  pain,  and  according  to  the  practitioner's 
knowledge  of  the  effect  of  morphine  on  the  individual.  It  may  be 
necessary  to  repeat  the  hypodermatic  use  of  morphine  and  atropine 
within  an  hour  or  so,  if  the  pain  has  not  abated,  and  it  should  not 
be  forgotten  that  in  using  morphine  in  this  way  we  are  employing  a 
remedy  which  will  also  assist  in  causing  relaxation  of  the  muscular 
spasm  ;  hence,  the  relief  of  pain  following  the  administration  of  mor- 
phine may  occasionally  occur  very  suddenly,  owing  to  the  gallstone 


GALLSTONES.  283 

having  passed  onward  into  the  intestine.  The  chief  object  of  treat- 
ment with  morphine  is  to  obtain  this  result,  and  not  simply  to  deaden 
pain  ;  hence  it  may  be  necessary  to  repeat  the  dose  a  second  or  even 
a  third  time,  if  the  relief  of  pain  is  only  partial. 

The  relaxation  of  muscular  spasm  is  greatly  facilitated  by  the 
use  of  hot  fomentations,  or  of  hot  baths  ;  indeed,  habitual  sufferers 
from  biliary  colic  are  so  well  acquainted  with  the  relief  afforded  that 
they  often  adopt  these  measures  pending  the  arrival  of  the  doctor. 
As  already  stated,  the  bath  should  be  as  hot  as  possible  without 
causing  pain,  and  with  appropriate  precautions  to  avoid  scalding.  It 
is  often  found  more  convenient  to  increase  the  temperature  of  the 
bath  gradually  by  the  addition  of  hot  water  during  the  time  of  im- 
mersion. To  be  of  much  service,  the  bath  should  permit  of  complete 
immersion.  If  only  ordinary  hip  or  sponge  baths  are  available,  it 
will  be  better  to  trust  to  fomentations  or  poultices,  since  the  pain  is 
so  great  and  the  restlessness  so  extreme  that  hip  or  sponge  baths  are 
practically  useless. 

When  there  is  no  vomiting,  muscular  relaxation  may  be  further 
favored  by  encouraging  the  patient  to  take  frequent  copious  draughts 
of  weak  tea  or  warm  water.  The  effect  of  the  latter  is  sometimes 
increased  if  it  contains  sodium  salicylate  and  sodium  bicarbonate, 
20  grains  of  the  former  and  6  grains  of  the  latter  to  the  pint.  Even 
when  vomiting  has  occurred,  this  alkaline  solution  may  still  be  toler- 
ated, and  will  often  prove  beneficial  if  taken  frequently  in  small 
doses,  although  a  large  draught  might  speedily  be  rejected.  It  is 
sometimes  recommended  that  other  anaesthetics,  more  particularly 
chloroform,  should  be  used  at  the  commencement  of  the  treatment, 
the  chloroform  being  given  by  inhalation.  This  may  be  of  service 
pending  the  action  of  morphine,  but  if  administered  after  the  hypo- 
dermatic use  of  morphine,  the  condition  of  the  pulse  and  respiration 
must  be  noted  closely,  and  the  anaesthetic  must  not  be  pushed  to  its 
full  extent,  since  dangerous  symptoms  may  occasionally  arise  when 
chloroform  is  used  after  the  hypodermatic  injection  of  morphine,  and 
moreover  the  anaesthetic  may  provoke  vomiting. 

Not  long  since  it  was  recommended  that  biliary  colic  should  be 
treated  with  olive  oil,  and,  from  the  fact  that  some  cases  of  biliary 
colic  seemed  to  be  relieved  after  the  use  of  olive  oil,  numerous  ex- 
planatory theories  have  been  put  forth ;  thus,  it  has  been  suggested 
that  the  oil  may  possess  some  solvent  powers,  or  that  it  may  cause 
relaxation  of  the  orifice  of  the  common  bile-duct,  or  that  its  benefits 


284  HEPATIC  DISEASES. 

may  be  attributed  to  the  mild  purgation,  or  at  least  to  increased 
peristalsis  following  its  administration.  These  explanatory  theories 
are  not  particularly  satisfactory,  and  indeed  they  appear  to  be  super- 
fluous, since  the  action  of  olive  oil  has  not  been  found  to  be  certain 
or  even  frequent,  and  it  is  possible  that  the  relief  of  pain  may  have 
resulted  from  the  action  of  other  remedies,  or  even  from  the  natural 
termination  of  the  attack. 

During  the  attack  of  hepatic  colic,  especially  when  the  pain  is 
very  severe,  patients  may  suffer  from  symptoms  of  collapse,  which, 
when  associated  with  much  vomiting,  necessarily  call  for  the  admin- 
istration of  diffusible  stimulants.  Those  which  are  most  readily 
taken  are,  as  a  rule,  to  be  preferred.  Small  doses  of  brandy  and 
water  may  give  great  relief  ;  but  when  the  collapse  is  severe  and  the 
pulse  becomes  weak  and  small,  it  may  be  necessary  to  employ  ether, 
and,  if  the  vomiting  is  frequent,  to  administer  the  same  hypoder- 
matically.  Even  the  employment  of  smelling-salts  may  sometimes 
be  beneficial  when  there  is  a  tendency  to  fainting. 

During  the  continuance  of  hepatic  colic,  purgatives  are  best 
avoided,  since,  by  favoring  the  formation  of  bile  and  by  necessi- 
tating more  frequent  bodily  movements,  they  will  commonly  in- 
crease the  pain ;  but  when  the  intestine  is  much  distended  with  an 
accumulation  of  flatus,  relief  may  be  afforded  by  enemata,  and  the 
action  is  frequently  increased  by  the  addition  of  a  small  amount  of 
turpentine.  It  has  sometimes  been  held  that  benefit  results  from 
the  violence  of  vomiting,  since  the  nausea  which  accompanies  this 
act  is  commonly  associated  with  some  reflex  relaxation  of  muscular 
tissue,  while  the  efforts  of  vomiting,  the  depression  of  the  diaphragm, 
and  the  contraction  of  the  abdominal  muscles  may  assist  in  dislodg- 
ing the  gallstone.  Acting  on  this  supposition,  some  practitioners  are 
in  favor  of  the  use  of  emetics,  and  if  there  is  much  nausea,  would 
promote  the  onset  of  vomiting  by  the  frequent  sipping  of  warm 
water.  It  is  generally  considered  that  there  is  some  risk  in  thus 
favoring  violent  propulsive  efforts,  especially  when  the  ]3assage  of 
the  gallstone  has  been  unduly  delayed,  and  when  there  may  be 
some  probability  of  inflammatory  changes  within  the  common  bile- 
duct  ;  accordingly,  in  protracted  cases  it  is  better  to  employ  reme- 
dies calculated  to  relieve,  rather  than  to  favor,  vomiting.  Under 
these  conditions,  the  use  of  diluted  hydrocyanic  acid  and  of  sodium 
salicylate  and  sodium  bicarbonate  has  been  already  mentioned.  The 
sodium  salicylate  more  particularly  is  likely  to  be  of  service,  since, 


GALLSTONES.  285 

without  increasing  the  amount  of  bile  formed,  it  is  credited  with  the 
power  of  rendering  the  bile  more  liquid. 

Hitherto  nothing  has  been  said  regarding  the  diet  to  be  followed, 
for  during  the  passage  of  a  gallstone  the  distress  is  so  great  as  to 
render  the  administration  of  food  impossible.  When  the  pain  is 
protracted,  small  amounts  of  iced  beef -tea  may  assist  in  maintaining 
the  patient's  strength. 

During  the  intervals  between  the  attacks  of  biliary  colic,  the  diet 
has  to  be  regulated,  and  the  habits,  more  particularly  those  relating 
to  exercise,  must,  as  a  rule,  be  altered.  With  regard  to  diet,  all 
excesses  must  be  avoided,  and  indeed  the  dietary  must  be  reduced 
to  the  minimum  consistent  with  comfort.  Uncooked  fruit  and  green 
vegetables  may  be  taken  freely,  since  they  commonly  increase  the 
activity  of  the  bile,  and  they  contain  no  materials  which  will  favor 
the  formation  of  gallstones.  In  the  selection  of  fruits,  however,  it 
is  advisable  to  employ,  as  far  as  possible,  such  fruits  only  as  are 
thoroughly  ripe  and  easily  digested ;  hard  fruits,  such  as  apples, 
should  be  cooked  before  being  eaten.  Nearly  all  other  articles  of 
diet  must  be  taken  in  moderation.  Animal  fats,  in  particular,  are 
credited  with  favoring  the  formation  of  gallstones  ;  while,  on  the 
other  hand,  farinaceous  foods  and  sugars  throw  an  increased  amount 
of  work  upon  the  liver,  and  may,  therefore,  do  harm.  Alcoholic 
beverages  also  should  not  be  employed,  since  they  so  frequently  tend 
to  interfere  with  the  hepatic  functions,  and  may,  indeed,  induce  gas- 
tric and  intestinal  catarrh,  which  may  form  the  starting-point  for 
irritative  changes  in  the  course  of  the  common  bile-duct,  and  may 
thus  favor  the  onset  of  fresh  attacks  of  hepatic  colic. 

It  is  generally  held  that  a  tendency  to  the  formation  of  gallstones 
is  increased  by  the  too  sparing  consumption  of  liquids,  and,  since  the 
deposition  of  bile  salts  must  undoubtedly  be  promoted  by  concen- 
tration of  bile,  it  is  desirable  to  take  fluids  freely.  The  beverages 
which  are  most  beneficial  are  the  alkaline  mineral  waters,  and  those 
which  contain  purgative  principles  in  addition  to  ordinary  alkaline 
ingredients  will  be  of  the  greatest  service.  To  diminish  the  risk  of 
the  formation  of  gallstones,  patients  are  frequently  sent  to  Carlsbad 
to  drink  the  waters.  It  must  not  be  forgotten,  however,  that  at 
Carlsbad  and  at  most  other  health  resorts  the  system  of  treatment 
entails  considerable  modification  in  the  diet  and  in  the  habits  of  the 
individual — modifications  which  ordinarily  involve  an  increased 
amount  of  exercise  and  a  diminished  quantity  of  food.    With  regard 


286  HEPATIC  DISEASES. 

to  the  habits  of  the  individual,  exercise  is,  as  a  rule,  beneficial,  but 
it  must  be  remembered  that  gallstones  are  frequently  found  even  in 
those  who  take  an  abundance  of  exercise  and  who  live  sparingly. 
The  most  beneficial  forms  of  exercise  are  walking  and  moderate 
gymnastics  ;  and  although  more  violent  exercise,  such  as  horse  riding 
or  bicycle  riding,  will  undoubtedly  diminish  the  tendency  to  the  for- 
mation of  gallstones,  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  if  calculi  are  already 
present  in  the  gall-bladder,  violent  movements  may  frequently  pre- 
cipitate an  attack  of  biliary  colic. 

It  is  commonly  believed  that  the  formation  of  gallstones  is  favored 
not  only  by  sedentary  habits,  but  by  prolonged  inactivity  of  the 
body,  and  that  those  who  spend  a  good  many  hours  in  sleep,  or  at 
least  in  bed,  may  prove  likely  subjects  for  this  disease ;  hence,  after 
an  attack  of  biliary  colic,  early  rising  should  be  enjoined,  and  if  the 
patient  needs  more  than  seven  hours'  sleep,  it  is  better  to  allow  a 
short  period  of  repose  during  the  afternoon,  if  the  circumstances  of 
the  patient  permit. 

Then  with  regard  to  medicinal  treatment  between  attacks,  or  sub- 
sequent to  an  acute  attack  of  biliary  colic,  the  first  essential  is  to 
insist  upon  the  use  of  laxatives  or  purgatives,  to  counteract  the 
common  tendency  to  constipation.  Frequently  the  occasional  use  of 
magnesium  sulphate  will  be  almost  all  that  is  required,  or,  in  place 
of  this,  Carlsbad  salts  may  be  taken,  either  alone  or  with  those  purga- 
tives that  are  credited  with  cholagogue  action. 

The  most  important  remedies  which  favor  the  evacuation  of  the 
gall-bladder  are  various  mercurial  preparations.  Blue  mass  or  gray 
powder  may  be  given  at  intervals  of  a  few  days,  or  J-grain  doses  of 
calomel  may  be  administered.  The  blue  mass,  or  calomel,  may  be 
mixed  with  ordinary  medicinal  doses  of  euonymin  (the  dry  extract 
of  euonymus)  or  podophyllin  (podophyllum  resin) — drugs  which  are 
credited  with  promoting  the  formation  of  bile.  Commonly,  how- 
ever, it  is  preferable  to  use  the  mercurial  alone,  or,  if  other  drugs 
are  given,  to  employ  those  which  favor  the  fluid  character  of  the 
bile  rather  than  those  which  increase  the  amount  formed.  Sodium 
salicylate  is  frequently  used  with  this  object,  15  grains  or  more 
being  given  three  or  four  times  a  day ;  while  ammonium  chloride, 
ammonium  phosphate,  and  sodium  benzoate  are  often  similarly  em- 
ployed. These  remedies,  however,  although  they  may  limit  the 
tendency  to  the  formation  of  fresh  calculi  or  even  the  increase  in 
size  of  those  already  in  the  gall-bladder,  do  not  appear  to  have  any 


GALLSTONES.  287 

power  of  diminishing  the  size  of  the  calculi  which  have  already 
been  formed.  If,  therefore,  the  patient  suffers  from  frequent  attacks 
of  biliary  colic,  surgical  measures  for  relief  must  be  considered.  The 
late  Dr.  George  Harley  was  in  favor  of  attempting  to  pass  gallstones 
down  the  common  bile-duct  by  external  manipulation,  and  he  be- 
lieved he  had  been  able,  on  many  occasions,  by  pressure  over  the 
gall-bladder,  to  dislodge  several  concretions.  This  proceeding  is, 
however,  not  devoid  of  risk,  and  it  is,  on  the  whole,  better  to  adopt 
surgical  measures  when  the  frequency  of  colic  or  the  appearance  of 
a  calculus  indicates  the  probable  presence  of  numerous  gallstones. 
Surgical  measures  may  be  called  for  even  during  an  attack  of  biliary 
colic,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  risks  of  septic  trouble  and 
of  secondary  hemorrhage  are  increased  when  the  patient  has  been 
allowed  to  remain  jaundiced  for  a  long  period.  Most  surgeons  now 
prefer  early  interference,  and  it  has  been  urged  that  a  frequent  suc- 
cession of  attacks  of  colic  will  increase  the  likelihood  of  the  forma- 
tion of  adhesions  around  the  gall-bladder,  and  will  thus  render  sub- 
sequent operation  more  dangerous. 

The  nature  of  the  operation  to  be  performed  was  recently  dis- 
cussed at  the  Surgical  Society  of  Paris,^  when  several  speakers  were 
in  favor  of  total  removal  of  the  gall-bladder  whenever  practicable. 
More  recently  Mayo  Robson^  has  discussed  the  same  subject  at 
length.  For  an  impacted  stone  in  the  common  duct  he  seems  to 
favor  pressing  the  stone  forward  or  backward  with  the  fingers,  com- 
bined perhaps  with  compression,  so  as  to  break  it  up ;  and  if  these 
efforts  should  fail,  he  considers  that  incision  of  the  duct  is  required 
when  the  condition  of  the  patient  appears  to  indicate  a  reasonable 
degree  of  safety.  McBurney^  has  described  the  removal  of  a  cal- 
culus through  an  incision  in  the  duodenum. 

It  may  be  stated,  in  general  terms,  that  operations  are  imperative 
when  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  stone  is  impacted  in  the 
cystic  duct  or  in  the  common  duct.  In  the  former  it  may  cause 
very  great  suffering,  even  though  there  may  be  no  jaundice ;  but 
when  in  the  common  duct  there  is  generally  considerable  jaundice, 
unless  the  angular  shape  of  the  stone  permits  the  bile  to  reach  the 
intestine.  The  duration  of  the  pain,  however,  in  these  cases,  as  in 
the  former,  may  afford  sufficient  indication  for  operation. 

^  Bull,  et  Mem.  de  la  Soc.  de  Chir.  de  Paris,  vol.  xxii. 
'^  British  Medical  Journal,  March,  1897. 
*  Annals  of  Surgery,  October,  1898. 


288  HEPATIC  DISEASES. 

Although  jaundice  is  a  common  symptom  associated  with  the 
passage  of  a  gallstone,  it  is  obviously  impossible  to  treat  this  symp- 
tom by  any  measures  which  do  not  attack  the  cause,  while  those 
symptoms  which  may  result  from  jaundice,  as,  for  example,  the  irri- 
tation of  the  skin  and  the  alteration  in  the  rapidity  of  the  pulse, 
must  be  treated  subsequently  by  measures  to  be  described  in  the 
next  section. 

Jaundice.  Jaundice  may  occur  from  obstruction,  or,  more  rarely, 
it  may  arise  without  any  indication  of  interference  with  the  free 
outlet  of  bile  from  the  gall-bladder.  Of  the  conditions  causing 
obstruction,  the  most  important  and  most  frequent  is  that  already 
described,  namely,  the  presence  of  a  gallstone  in  the  common  bile- 
duct  ;  but,  independently  of  a  gallstone,  the  free  outflow  of  bile 
may  be  interfered  with  by  a  plug  of  mucus  in  the  duct,  or  by  the 
obstruction  due  to  the  presence  of  a  round  worm  in  the  duct.  More 
common,  perhaps,  than  any  of  the  above,  is  the  catarrhal  jaundice 
due  to  mild  inflammation  in  the  course  of  the  duct,  such  as  may 
arise  in  connection  with  irritation  of  the  stomach  and  duodenum, 
as,  for  example,  with  acute  gastritis.  The  bile  appears  to  be  formed 
at  a  very  low  pressure,  and,  therefore,  a  slight  degree  of  inflamma- 
tory thickening  of  the  common  duct,  or  of  its  orifice,  will  suffice  to 
prevent  the  free  evacuation  of  the  gall-bladder,  and  will  thus  favor 
the  reabsorption  of  bile. 

Jaundice  due  to  catarrhal  thickening,  or  to  the  presence  of  a  gall- 
stone, is  commonly  of  short  duration.  Catarrhal  jaundice  may  last 
on  an  average  from  two  to  three  weeks,  but  its  period  may  be  as 
short  as  one  week,  or  as  long  as  three  months,  though  when  it  con- 
tinues as  long  as  this,  anxiety  must  be  felt  lest  the  obstruction  is 
due  to  some  more  permanent  cause.  The  most  important  of  the 
permanent  causes  of  obstruction  are  malignant  growths  connected 
with  the  liver,  with  the  pylorus,  or  with  the  pancreas,  and  affecting 
the  glands  in  the  transverse  fissure  of  the  liver.  These  glands  may 
also  be  involved  in  a  tubercular  process,  and  pressure  may  also  be 
exerted  by  aneurisms,  by  fecal  accumulations,  or  even  by  the  press- 
ure of  a  pregnant  uterus.  Another  form  of  jaundice  which  is  fre- 
quently seen  is  that  associated  with  chronic  hepatic  changes,  as,  for 
example,  with  cirrhosis,  or  with  passive  engorgement  of  the  vessels. 
Under  these  circumstances,  the  jaundice  is  usually  relatively  slight 
and  does  not  demand  separate  treatment.  Tiie  form  of  jaundice 
which  it  will  be  most  convenient  to  consider  here  is  that  dependent 


JAUNDICE.  289 

upon  catarrhal  changes  in  the  bile-duct,  since  many  of  the  conditions 
above  mentioned  are  either  not  amenable  to  treatment,  or  else  can 
be  dealt  with  only  by  surgical  measures. 

The  first  essential  in  the  treatment  of  jaandice  is  to  ascertain  the 
cause.  To  some  extent  this  may  be  indicated  by  the  nature  of  the 
associated  symptoms,  and  more  particularly  by  the  rapidity  with 
which  jaundice  occurs  after  severe  pain  in  the  region  of  the  gall- 
bladder. With  the  ordinary  obstructive  form  of  jaundice,  due  to 
catarrh  of  the  bile  passages,  although  complaint  of  pain  may  be 
made,  the  pain  is  not  nearly  so  severe  as  with  the  passage  of  a 
gallstone,  and  indeed  it  may  consist  more  of  discomfort  and  perhaps 
tenderness  over  the  region  of  the  liver  than  of  actual  pain.  It  has 
already  been  indicated  that  with  gallstones  pain  is  severe  at  the 
(iommencement,  and  that  the  symptoms  of  jaundice  only  occur  a 
few  days  later.  Owing  to  the  severity  of  the  attack  of  biliary  colic, 
the  patient  is  commonly  confined  to  his  bed  from  the  commence- 
ment, while  with  obstructive  jaundice  the  discomfort  is  usually  so 
slight  that  he  may  pursue  his  ordinary  vocations. 

With  cases  of  obstruction  which  ar?  not  the  result  of  gallstone, 
the  first  symptoms  to  claim  attention  will  be  those  of  gastric  catarrh, 
which  are  so  frequently  the  prelude  to  the  jaundice.  These  symp- 
toms may  be  dealt  with  partly  by  modifying  the  diet  and  partly  by 
gastric  sedatives.  The  diet  should  be  rendered  light  and  nutritious, 
but  it  need  not  of  necessity  consist  solely  of  liquids,  though  from 
the  severity  of  the  catarrh  the  patient  will  commonly  express  a 
preference  for  a  liquid,  diet,  or  at  least  for  a  diet  from  which  meat 
and  fats  are  excluded.  Weak  tea,  dry  toast,  and  a  farinaceous 
dietary  will  generally  tend  to  allay  symptoms  of  gastric  catarrh, 
and  at  the  same  time  preparations  of  bismuth  and  diluted  hydro- 
cyanic acid  may  be  prescribed  ;  these  not  only  relieve  pain,  but  also 
tend  to  check  vomiting  and  nausea.  Since  in  these  cases  the  gas- 
tric catarrh  is  commonly  associated  with  constipation,  it  may  be 
advisable,  at  the  commencement  of  the  treatment,  to  employ  mild 
purgatives.  A  small  dose  of  calomel  will  often  be  beneficial,  and 
the  action  of  calomel  may  be  favored  by  the  subsequent  administra- 
tion of  effervescing  saline  purgatives,  which  may  be  continued  on 
alternate  mornings,  or  oftener  if  necessary,  during  the  continuance 
of  the  jaundice. 

The  use  of  more  active  purgatives,  more  particularly  of  vegetable 
purgatives,  is  distinctly  contraindicated  in  cases  of  obstructive  jaun- 

19 


290  HEPATIC  DISEASES. 

dice,  since  many  of  the  vegetable  purgatives  are  comparatively  in- 
operative in  the  absence  of  bile.  Further,  there  appears  to  be  no 
advantage  in  causing  frequent  and  copious  action  of  the  bowels, 
since  in  cases  of  jaundice  the  appetite  so  commonly  fails  early  in  the 
disease  that  there  can  be  no  benefit  from  frequent  purgation,  and, 
moreover,  violent  purgatives  might  only  tend  to  increase  the  irrita- 
tion which  is  probably  already  present  within  the  stomach  and  in- 
testine. 

When  there  is  much  discomfort  over  the  region  of  the  liver  some 
relief  may  be  afforded  by  local  applications,  such  as  mustard  poultices 
or  hot  fomentations.  The  dyspeptic  symptoms  may  frequently  call 
for  the  administration  of  alkalies,  especially  if  the  bismuth  prepa- 
rations give  but  little  relief.  Of  the  alkalies,  sodium  bicarbonate 
is  undoubtedly  the  best  and  most  commonly  used.  This  may  be 
given  in  conjunction  with  bismuth  oxycarbonate  and  hydrocyanic 
acid,  but  it  should  not  be  prescribed  in  conjunction  with  bismuth 
subnitrate,  since  the  latter  so  frequently  possesses  sufficient  free  acid 
to  form  an  effervescing  mixture.  Sometimes  it  is  more  convenient 
to  administer  alkaline  mineral  waters,  such  as  Vichy  or  Apollinaris, 
which  may  be  taken  alone  or  mixed  with  warm  milk ;  in  place  of 
these,  ammonium  chloride,  sodium  salicylate,  or  sodium  phosphate 
may  be  given.  I  must  confess  that  I  have  rarely  found  it  necessary 
to  employ  these  last-named  preparations,  although  many  observers 
speak  enthusiastically  of  the  value  of  ammonium  chloride,  and  even 
of  ammonium  phosphate.  If  the  jaundice  depended  merely  upon 
inspissation  of  bile,  no  doubt  these  remedies,  which  increase  its  fluid 
character,  might  be  beneficial ;  but  in  most  cases  of  catarrhal  jaun- 
dice the  cause  of  retention  lies  in  the  narrowing  of  the  bile  passages 
by  inflammatory  changes,  rather  than  in  the  retention  of  the  bile, 
owing  to  its  altered  physical  characters. 

Another  form  of  treatment  which  has  been  advocated,  but  which 
in  my  practice  it  has  never  been  necessary  to  employ,  is  the  admin- 
istration of  an  emetic  at  an  early  stage.  Ordinarily  there  is  no 
great  tendency  to  vomiting,  unless  in  cases  of  obstruction  from  gall- 
stones, or  when  the  gastritis  is  unusually  severe  ;  it  has  been  thought, 
however,  that  emetics  might  be  serviceable  in  dislodging  plugs  of 
mucus  or  small  concretions  which  might  be  blocking  the  orifice  of 
the  common  bile-duct.  The  irrigation  of  the  large  intestine  with 
quantities  of  cold  water  has  been  recommended  in  the  treatment  of 
jaundice,  but  this   proceeding  does  not   always   give  satisfactory 


CHRONIC  OBSTRUCTIVE  JAUNDICE.  291 

results ;  in  fact,  many  who  have  tried  it  for  a  length  of  time  do  not 
appear  to  be  convinced  that  it  has  any  beneficial  influence.  Another 
course  of  treatment  that  has  been  highly  recommended  consists  in 
the  application  of  diluted  hydrochloric  acid  over  the  region  of  the 
liver.  Beale  recommends  that  the  strong  acid  should  be  diluted 
with  twice  its  bulk  of  water,  and  that  a  rag  should  be  carefully 
wetted  with  this  lotion  and  placed  over  the  liver,  and  then  covered 
with  some  old  rags  or  with  an  old  towel,  and  he  states  that  the  only 
discomfort  it  produces  is  a  little  tingling  of  the  skin.  Possibly  this 
may  be  of  service  as  a  counter-irritant  when  the  liver  is  much 
enlarged  as  the  result  of  obstructive  jaundice ;  but  in  general  the 
same  object  may  perhaps  be  attained  more  conveniently  by  the  use 
of  poultices  or  fomentations. 

Chronic  Obstructive  Jaundice.  When,  in  spite  of  the  fore- 
going treatment,  the  jaundice  persists,  the  case  becomes  one  of  con- 
siderable anxiety,  since  the  cause  of  the  obstruction  may  ultimately 
prove  to  be  of  a  more  serious  nature  than  had  at  first  been  supposed, 
and,  as  in  cases  of  jaundice  from  obstruction  by  gallstones,  operative 
measures  for  the  relief  of  obstruction  will  probably  have  to  be  dis- 
cussed. When  the  jaundice  is  associated  with  pain,  the  idea  of 
operation  becomes  more  pressing ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  it  will 
frequently  be  founi  that,  as  in  acute  jaundice  dependent  on  inflam- 
matory obstruction,  patients  are  able  to  be  up  and  even  to  continue 
their  ordinary  work,  so  in  chronic  jaundice  there  is  in  general  very 
little  pain,  and  the  chief  symptoms  consist  in  the  absence  of  bile 
pigments  from  the  motions,  and  its  presence  in  the  urine,  the  con- 
junctivae, and  in  the  subcutaneous  tissues.  Even  in  chronic  cases; 
devoid  of  pain,  operative  measures  may  sometimes  be  adopted  for 
the  relief  of  jaundice,  more  particularly  when  the  continuance  of  this, 
symptom  is  associated  with  much  disturbance  of  general  nutrition. 
An  exploratory  operation  may  be  performed  with  comparatively 
little  risk  and  with  the  possibility  of  affording  great  relief.  But,, 
on  the  other  hand,  if  the  patient  is  unwilling  to  face  the  anxieties 
of  an  operation,  and  if  the  condition  does  not  even  appear  to  neces- 
sitate one  of  an  exploratory  nature,  measures  must  be  adopted  to 
counteract  the  evils  attendant  on  the  absence  of  bile  from  the  intes- 
tinal canal.  In  cases  of  acute  jaundice  the  measures  hitherto  recom- 
mended include  mainly  various  forms  of  treatment  pending  the  re- 
establishment  of  the  natural  functions  of  the  liver ;  but  in  chronic 
jaundice  the  continued  absence  of  bile  has  to  be  faced,  and  clinical 


292  HEPATIC  DISEASES. 

experience  shows  that  absence  of  bile  is  followed  commonly  by  defi- 
nite symptoms  due  mainly  to  partial  decomposition  of  the  contents 
of  the  intestine  and  associated  with  constipation.  It  becomes  neces- 
sary, therefore,  to  regulate  the  diet  of  the  patient  in  accordance  with 
this  condition,  and,  at  the  same  time,  to  encourage  habits  of  life 
which  will  favor  the  re-establishment  of  the  functions  of  the  liver. 

With  regard  to  diet,  this  should  be  nutritious  but  sparing ;  fats 
should  be  eliminated  from  the  dietary,  and  carbohydrates  should 
also  be  reduced  in  amount,  and,  so  far  as  possible,  the  individual 
should  be  encouraged  to  obtain  his  necessary  nutriment  from  nitrog- 
enous materials,  lean  meat,  nutritious  soups,  or  concentrated  meat 
juice. 

Although  alcoholic  stimulants  are  best  avoided  as  a  general  rule, 
conditions  may  arise  which  necessitate  their  employment.  Cases  of 
chronic  jaundice  are  frequentl}^  associated  with  much  circulatory 
and  mental  depression,  and,  to  some  extent,  both  of  these  symptoms 
may  be  controlled  by  the  judicious  use  of  stimulants.  It  is  essen- 
tial, however,  when  it  is  considered  necessary  to  employ  stimulants, 
to  keep  in  mind  the  possible  origin  of  the  jaundice  in  an  attack  of 
gastritis  and  duodenitis  due  to  alcoholic  irritation  ;  heace,  stimulants, 
if  used  at  all,  should  be  freely  diluted,  and  they  should  always  be 
taken  with  food,  so  as  to  produce  the  minimum  of  irritation  upon 
the  stomach,  the  duodenum,  and  the  liver.  If  given  in  concentrated 
form,  or  in  large  doses,  they  may  do  considerably  more  harm  than 
good. 

The  slow  pulse  of  jaundice  is  a  well-recognized  symptom  of  the 
disease,  and,  so  long  as  this  diminution  of  the  rate  is  not  accompa- 
nied by  much  loss  of  force,  the  use  of  stimulants  is  not  indicated ; 
but  if,  on  the  other  hand,  the  pulse  is  not  only  slow  but  becomes 
weak  and  irregular,  and  if,  moreover,  there  is  any  tendency  to  faint- 
ing, stimulants  are  urgently  required.  Similarly  with  regard  to  the 
mental  depression  so  often  seen  with  jaundice  ;  it  must  be  carefully 
considered  whether  the  depression  is  due  to  this  symptom,  or  whether 
both  the  jaundice  and  the  mental  depression  are  dependent  upon  a 
common  cause,  such  as  alcoholic  irritation,  or  the  deficient  nutrition 
which  so  often  accompanies  chronic  alcoholism.  Frequently,  as  will 
be  mentioned  shortly,  the  circulatory  and  mental  depression  must 
be  treated  by  drugs  other  than  alcohol. 

In  chronic  catarrhal  jaundice  it  is  desirable  to  encourage  regular 
exercise,  even  though  there  may  be  a  strong  disinclination  to  any 


CHRONIC  OBSTRUCTIVE  JAUNDICE.  293 

form  of  muscular  exertion.  Riding  is  often  beneficial  when  the 
jaundice  is  not  dependent  upon  obstruction  due  to  biliary  calculi, 
but  if  calculi  are  present  in  the  gall-bladder,  this  form  of  exercise 
may  precipitate  an  attack  of  biliary  colic. 

Chronic  catarrh  of  the  gall-bladder  and  chronic  catarrhal  jaun- 
dice often  appear  to  have  some  dependence  upon  injudiciously  tight 
clothing,  more  particularly  in  females ;  hence  it  becomes  necessary 
to  enjoin  the  strict  avoidance  of  any  tight  constrictions  by  which 
the  shape  of  the  liver  might  be  altered  or  its  functions  interfered 
with  by  the  upward  pressure  of  the  viscera. 

Saline  aperients  will  be  necessary  in  this  condition,  as  in  acute 
catarrhal  jaundice,  and,  for  reasons  already  stated,  the  saline  purga- 
tives are  preferable  to  purgatives  of  vegetable  origin.  The  most 
convenient  of  the  salines  are  the  preparations  of  magnesium  sul- 
phate, or  of  sodium  sulphate  or  tartrate,  and  the  effervescent  prepa- 
rations are  frequently  more  readily  taken  than  the  mineral  waters 
which  contain  these  salts.  Some  patients,  however,  prefer  the  use 
of  saline  aperient  waters,  such  as  those  of  Cheltenham  or  Leaming- 
ton, or  those  of  Carlsbad,  Marienbad,  or  Franzensbad.  Frequently 
the  activity  of  the  saline  aperient  waters  is  increased  by  their  admin- 
istration when  diluted  with  warm  water. 

The  measures  above  indicated  serve  not  only  to  increase  the  com- 
fort of  the  individual,  but  to  some  extent  they  favor  a  restoration  of 
the  normal  conditions  under  which  the  bile  formed  within  the  liver 
may  obtain  access  to  the  intestine,  instead  of  being  absorbed  by  the 
blood.  It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  the  use  of  so-called  cholagogues 
is  not  required  under  these  conditions,  since  the  presence  of  jaundice 
is  an  indication  that  the  secreting  work  of  the  liver  is  being  properly 
performed,  even  though  the  secretion  is  not  able  to  enter  the  intes- 
tine. For  the  relief  of  symptoms  resulting  from  the  absence  of  bile, 
the  purified  ox  bile  of  the  Pharmacoposia  may  be  administered,  in 
doses  of  from  5  to  15  grains.  This  remedy  is  credited  with  aiding 
the  absorption  of  fats  and  peptones,  with  diminishing  putrefaction, 
and  with  stimulating  peristalsis ;  theoretically,  therefore,  it  should 
be  of  extreme  service  in  these  cases.  It  must  be  confessed,  however, 
that  it  is  not  extensively  used,  and  that  it  has  the  disadvantage  of 
interfering  with  gastric  digestion.  If  employed,  it  should  be  given 
in  small  glutol  capsules,  or  in  pills  coated  with  keratin,  so  as  to 
favor  the  intestinal  action,  while  avoiding  the  risk  of  disturbing  the 
gastric  functions. 


294  HEPATIC  DISEASES. 

Other  modes  of  attaining  intestinal  antisepsis  are  usually  pre- 
ferred, as,  for  example,  the  employment  of  creosote,  which  may  be 
administered  in  doses  of  from  1  to  5  minims,  emulsified  or  in  cap- 
sules. A  mixture  of  creosote,  made  with  spirit  of  juniper  and  syrup, 
contains  1  minim  to  the  ounce ;  or  the  drug  may  be  made  into  an 
emulsion  as  in  the  following  formula  : 

R.— Creosote Tllv. 

Compound  tincture  of  gentian         ....  1Tts:Y. 

Alcohol .  TTLxv. 

Fluid  extract  of  liquorice       .....  Ttlxxx. 

Water q.  s.  ad  ^j. 

In  the  above  emulsion  the  proportion  of  creosote  may  be  adapted 
to  the  needs  of  the  individual.  Creosote  is  best  taken  after  meals. 
Creosote  carbonate  (creosotal)  is  credited  with  being  less  disagree- 
able than  creosote ;  it  can  be  given  in  from  5  to  20-grain  doses,  as 
a  pill.  More  recently  guaiacol  and  guaiacol  carbonate  have  been 
employed ;  these  are  used  in  3-grain  doses  in  cachets,  and  are  cred- 
ited with  inducing  less  irritation  of  the  digestive  organs,  and  with 
the  power  of  being  decomposed  into  their  component  parts  in  the 
intestine.  Doses  of  f  grain  to  2  grains  of  thymol  have  also  been 
given  in  pills  with  powdered  soap  and  a  small  quantity  of  alcohol, 
and,  like  the  foregoing,  these  appear  to  control  intestinal  putrefac- 
tion if  given  after  meals. 

Of  the  special  symptoms  connected  with  both  acute  and  chronic 
obstructive  jaundice,  one  of  the  most  trying  is  cutaneous  irritation. 
For  the  relief  of  this  symptom  many  remedies  have  been  used,  but, 
as  a  rule,  with  indifferent  success.  The  cutaneous  functions  should 
be  favored,  particularly  in  chronic  cases,  by  the  frequent  employ- 
ment of  warm  baths,  followed  by  the  use  of  a  rough  towel  and  by 
warm  flannel  clothing.  These  serve  to  promote  diaphoresis,  which 
may  be  further  encouraged  either  by  a  vapor  bath  or  by  a  warm 
pack.  Should  these  measures  fail,  and  should  the  itching  be  intol- 
erable, diaphoresis  may  be  promoted  by  the  hypodermatic  use  of  pilo- 
carpine nitrate,  in  doses  of  from  -^-^  grain  to  ^  grain.  .  In  medium 
doses,  such  as  |-  or  ^  grain,  pilocarpine  may  be  used  two  or  three 
times  a  day,  and  sometimes  the  relief  afforded  is  said  to  be  very 
great.  When  using  this  remedy  it  will,  of  course,  be  necessary  to 
warn  the  patient  of  the  risk  of  exposure  to  cold  while  the  skin  is 
acting  freely. 

The  albuminuria,  which  may  occur  with  acute  or  chronic  jaun- 


ICTERUS  NEONATORUM.  295 

dice,  scarcely  calls  for  treatment,  but,  since  it  appears  to  be  dependent 
upon  the  irritation  of  the  kidney  by  pigment,  the  elimination  of  this 
pigment  may  be  promoted  by  the  use  of  diuretics.  It  is  rarely 
necessary  to  employ  the  more  stimulating  diuretics,  since  the  elimi- 
nation may  be  promoted  by  the  consumption  of  quantities  of  water, 
more  particularly  if  this  is  taken  in  an  alkaline  form,  Vichy 
water  or  water  containing  sodium  bicarbonate  will  often  be  of  ser- 
vice, and  during  their  use  the  albuminuria  is  commonly  dimin- 
ished. 

With  regard  to  the  weakness  of  the  circulation  which  is  often  asso- 
ciated with  jaundice,  in  addition  to  the  use  of  stimulants,  it  will 
sometimes  be  desirable  to  employ  cardiac  tonics,  such  as  digitalis 
or  strophanthus,  in  order  to  increase  the  force  of  the  contractions  of 
the  ventricle.  Of  these  two  remedies  the  former  is  to  be  preferred, 
since  it  possesses  diuretic  powers  in  addition  to  its  cardiac  tonic 
action.  It  is  occasionally  desirable  to  combine  with  either  of  these 
drugs  J-drachm  doses  of  the  aromatic  spirit  of  ammonia.  It  is 
sometimes  found  advisable  to  combat  both  the  mental  and  the  circu- 
latory depression  by  the  use  of  quinine  or  of  nux  vomica ;  occasion- 
ally, however,  the  mental  depression  is  better  dealt  with  by  ammo- 
nium brohiide. 

Although  the  above  account  of  chronic  obstructive  jaundice  deals 
mainly  with  the  treatment  of  this  symptom  when  due  to  chronic 
catarrhal  conditions,  many  of  the  same  principles  of  treatment  may 
be  followed  in  connection  with  chronic  jaundice  resulting  from  ob- 
struction due  to  the  presence  of  tumors  pressing  on  the  common 
bile-duct ;  thus,  for  example,  the  general  principles  of  intestinal  anti- 
sepsis, the  desirability  of  exercise,  and  of  the  modifications  of  diet, 
will  be  equally  applicable  to  the  relief  of  symptoms  in  these  cases, 
even  though  they  do  not  afford  any  prospect  of  permanent  allevia- 
tion. 

Icterus  Neonatorum,  or  the  idiopathic  jaundice  of  new-born  chil- 
dren, is  frequently  seen  and  demands  mention  here,  although  the  con- 
dition is  not  one  which  ordinarily  calls  for  treatment.  The  yellow  tint 
is  generally  seen  on  the  second  or  third  day  of  life,  and  it  may  increase 
in  intensity  for  one  or  two  days.  In  mild  cases  the  jaundice  may 
disappear  entirely  in  three  or  four  days,  and  it  is  very  rare  for  it  to 
continue  for  so  long  as  ten  days  or  a  fortnight.  The  tinging  differs 
from  that  commonly  seen  with  other  forms  of  jaundice,  since  the 
eyes  are  usually  normal  or  but  slightly  affected,  while  the  skin, 


296  HEPATIC  DISEASES. 

more  particularly  about  the  face,  shows  the  greatest  amount  of  bile- 
staining.  This  jaundice  also  rarely  causes  any  tinging  of  the  urine, 
while  the  feces  may  be  normal  in  appearance  and  are  certainly  not 
decolorized,  as  in  obstructive  jaundice.  It  is  unnecessary  here  to 
enter  into  the  interesting  discussion  connected  with  the  mode  of 
origin  of  this  form  of  jaundice.  It  will  be  sufficient  to  allay  the 
natural  anxieties  of  the  parent  by  indicating  that  the  prognosis  is 
invariably  good. 

Congestion  of  the  Liver.  Congestion  of  the  liver — that  is,  over- 
fulness  of  the  bloodvessels  resulting  in  some  increase  in  the  size  of 
the  organ — occurs  in  several  forms  which  arise  from  different  causes. 
Passive  congestion  is  the  form  commonly  induced  by  various  dis- 
orders which  impede  the  return  of  blood  to  the  right  side  of  the 
heart ;  hence  this  condition  will  be  found  with  chronic  heart  disease 
when  compensation  is  failing,  and  it  may  also  occur  as  one  of  the 
side  symptoms  of  lung  trouble  connected  with  imperfect  circulation 
through  a  large  portion  of  the  lung,  as,  for  example,  with  emphysema 
and  with  chronic  bronchitis.  This  passive  congestion  is  of  com- 
paratively little  importance,  since  the  symptoms  due  to  the  hepatic 
condition  are  overshadowed  by  the  gravity  of  the  primary  disease. 
Passive  congestion  is  associated  with  some  tenderness  in  the  region 
of  the  liver,  some  increase  of  size,  and  some  pulsation  which  is  com- 
monly communicated  from  the  distended  right  side  of  the  heart ; 
symptoms  of  disordered  digestion  will  also  probably  be  prominent, 
although  they  depend  upon  the  same  cause  as  the  hepatic  condition, 
instead  of  being  directly  due  to  alteration  in  the  liver. 

Whether  resulting  from  heart-failure  or  from  lung  trouble,  the 
indications  for  treatment  are  sufficiently  clear.  Remedies  for  the 
primary  disease  must  necessarily  be  used.  In  heart  disease  the 
remedies  should  be  those  which  increase  the  contractile  force  of  the 
ventricles  and  promote  more  efficient  work,  so  that  less  obstacle  is 
presented  to  the  onward  passage  of  blood.  When  due  to  lung 
trouble,  the  treatment  must  depend  upon  the  nature  of  the  lung 
affection.  Stimulant  expectorants  are  usually  of  considerable  ser- 
vice in  promoting  the  expectoration  of  fluid  from  the  bronchial 
tubes,  and  thus  relieving  the  engorgement  of  the  bronchial  and  pul- 
monary vessels.  Further  benefit  will,  however,  result  from  the  use 
of  mild  depletory  measures,  the  most  important  being  those  which 
act  on  the  intestine.  Should  there  be  much  complaint  of  pain  in 
the  region  of  the  liver,  a  small  quantity  of  blood  may  be  abstracted 


CONGESTION  OF  THE  LIVER.  297 

by  applying  leeches  along  the  costal  margin,  or  pain  may  be  dimin- 
ished by  the  use  of  fomentations.  More  frequently,  however,  relief 
will  be  obtained  from  the  occasional  employment  of  small  doses  of 
mild  mercurous  chloride,  f  grain  to  1  grain,  which  may  be  given 
with  cascara  sagrada  and  compound  extract  of  colocynth  if  there 
is  much  constipation,  or  with  euonymin  if  the  motions  are  deficient 
in  bile  pigment.  In  the  ordinary  course,  however,  passive  engorge- 
ment scarcely  demands  treatment  other  than  that  required  for  the 
disease  which  gives  rise  to  the  engorgement. 

There  are  some  forms  of  engorgement  which  are  not  thus  depen- 
dent upon  failure  of  the  work  of  other  organs,  as,  for  example,  the 
active  congestion  which  is  commonly  seen  as  the  result  of  frequent 
irritation  of  the  liver  with  alcohol.  It  appears  probable  that,  inde- 
pendently of  gastritis,  some  overfulness  of  the  hepatic  vessels  may 
be  produced  by  the  frequent  consumption  of  alcohol,  either  in  over- 
doses or  in  too  concentrated  a  form.  The  dilatation  of  vessels  that 
results  may  be  sufficient  to  interfere  seriously  with  the  ordinary 
functions  of  the  liver.  Similar  dilatation  will  also  frequently  arise 
from  reckless  over-indulgence  in  food.  Those  who  take  large  meals 
at  short  intervals  are  peculiarly  prone  to  suffer  from  this  form  of 
active  engorgement,  since  the  frequent  consumption  of  a  large  quan- 
tity of  food  is  necessarily  followed  by  great  dilatation  of  the  gastric 
vessels,  and,  therefore,  by  an  increased  flow  of  blood  through  the 
vessels  of  the  liver ;  and  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that,  under  these 
circumstances,  not  only  is  more  blood  conveyed  to  the  liver,  but  the 
amount  of  work  thrown  upon  that  organ  is  greatly  increased.  Active 
congestion  may  also  result  from  cold.  Sudden  chills  of  the  surface, 
especially  when  the  body  has  been  previously  overheated,  may  be 
followed  by  active  congestion  ;  thus  it  may  follow  from  bathing  at 
midday  after  violent  exercise,  or  from  chill  after  exposure  to  rain, 
or  from  wearing  clothes  saturated  with  perspiration,  as,  for  example, 
after  bicycling. 

Active  congestion  often  occurs  in  connection  with  exposure  to 
malarial  influences.  Sometimes  enlargement  of  the  liver  will  accom- 
pany the  rigors  and  other  symptoms  of  malaria,  while  at  other  times 
the  main  toxic  influence  appears  to  be  expended  upon  the  liver.  In 
malarial  districts,  therefore,  hepatic  changes  are  frequent,  indepen- 
dently of  other  evidences  of  malaria.  This  condition  will  also  often 
be  met  with  in  cases  of  chronic  dilatation  of  the  stomach,  but  the 
explanation  of  this  circumstance  is  not  very  obvious,  though  possibly 


298  HEPATIC  DISEASES. 

it  is  to  be  found  in  the  altered  nature  of  the  blood-supply  which 
reaches  the  liver. 

The  symptoms  of  active  congestion  of  the  liver  are  in  part  the 
result  of  the  enlargement  of  the  liver,  and  in  part  due  to  the  inter- 
ference with  its  functions.  The  enlargement  is  frequently  associated 
with  a  sense  of  weight  and  discomfort  on  the  right  side  of  the  body, 
and  there  may  often  be  tenderness  on  pressure,  or  on  percussion  over 
tlie  epigastrium.  As  with  other  forms  of  active  engorgement,  there 
is  commonly  some  rise  of  temperature,  but  the  course  of  the  tem- 
perature does  not  follow  any  characteristic  line.  Frequently,  espe- 
cially when  due  to  over-indulgence  in  fond  or  in  alcohol,  there  will 
be  symptoms  of  gastro-intestinal  irritation,  such  as  loss  of  appetite, 
impaired  digestion,  and  perhaps  nausea,  or  even  vomiting.  Occa- 
sionally there  may  be  slight  jaundice,  especially  noticeable  about 
the  conjunctivae,  but,  independently  of  this  symptom,  the  motions 
are  often  found  to  be  pale  and  clay-like,  although  they  may  be 
passed  fairly  frequently,  and  there  may  be  some  tendency  to  diar- 
rhoea. As  with  other  forms  of  interference  with  the  elimination  of 
bile,  the  urine  is  apt  to  become  high-colored  and  bile-tinged.  More 
general  constitutional  disturbance  will  be  indicated  by  inability  to 
concentrate  thought ;  there  is  often  also  some  degree  of  muscular 
lassitude  and  of  mental  depression. 

In  the  treatment  of  acute  congestion  of  the  liver  it  is  important 
to  ascertain  the  influence  both  of  errors  of  diet  and  of  other  forms 
of  bad  habits,  and  to  correct  them.  When  the  case  is  marked  by 
mild  symptoms,  very  slight  modifications  of  habits  may  suffice  to 
effect  the  cure.  In  any  case  it  is  advisable  to  insist  upon  a  some- 
what sparing  diet  of  an  unirritating  type,  and  to  counsel  the  dis- 
continuance of  alcoholic  stimulants.  It  is  generally  unnecessary  to 
interfere  with  the  ordinary  occupation  of  the  individual,  unless  this 
occupation  entails  much  worry,  or  unless  it  leads  to  undue  haste  over 
meals.  Certainly,  the  symptoms  are  rarely  sufficient  for  it  to  be 
desirable  for  the  patient  to  keep  in  bed,  although  it  is  commonly 
found  that  a  moderation  of  the  ordinary  amount  of  exercise  will  be 
beneficial.  Frequently  one  or  other  of  the  mineral  waters  should 
be  recommended,  and  in  cases  of  recurring  acute  congestion  much 
benefit  may  be  derived  from  a  short  course  at  one  of  the  Continental 
spas. 

The  benefit  thus  obtained  is  by  no  means  solely  dependent 
upon  the  nature  of  the  mineral  water,  although  to  some  extent  the 


CONGESTION  OF  THE  LIVER.  299 

laxative  action  is  advantageous.  A  large  element  in  the  cure  lies 
in  the  enforced  detachment  from  business  worries,  in  the  relative 
idleness  entailed,  and  in  the  strict  regulation  of  diet  which  is  com- 
monly enforced. 

For  mild  cases,  or  for  patients  with  sufficient  self-control  to  enable 
them  to  follow  directions,  it  is  quite  unnecessary  to  adopt  a  course 
of  treatment  which  involves  so  much  expense  and  so  much  inter- 
ference with  the  ordinary  occupations ;  but  for  many  business  men, 
above  all  for  those  engaged  in  subordinate  positions  in  offices,  the 
advisability  of  a  Continental  spa  becomes  almost  a  necessity,  since 
without  such  complete  detachment  from  their  ordinary  occupations 
they  may  find  it  impossible  to  follow  instructions. 

When  the  congestion  is  marked  by  febrile  symptoms,  it  will,  how- 
ever, be  necessary  to  advise  a  few  days'  rest  in  bed,  even  though  the 
temperature  is  not  in  itself  an  element  of  risk.  During  the  time 
spent  in  bed,  mild  saline  and  alkaline  remedies  may  be  employed 
with  advantage,  and  if  there  is  much  complaint  of  pain  in  the  region 
of  the  liver,  or  much  tenderness,  relief  may  be  obtained  from  the 
use  of  leeches,  or  of  fomentations.  Occasionally,  when  the  conges- 
tion is  distinctly  to  be  traced  to  exposure  to  cold,  similar  treatment 
may  be  adopted  ;  but  frequently,  in  the  absence  of  febrile  symptoms, 
patients  will  be  found  to  rebel  against  the  enforced  inactivity,  and 
many  cases  of  hepatic  congestion  from  chill  may  run  a  mild  course 
without  needing  any  great  interference  with  the  ordinary  habits. 
The  duration  of  the  attack  will  be  shortened  by  rest  in  bed,  and 
the  likelihood  of  the  development  of  other  symptoms  may  possibly 
be  diminished ;  but  with  previously  healthy  individuals,  slight 
attacks  of  hepatic  congestion  may  not  be  sufficient  to  necessitate 
interruption  of  ordinary  work,  nor  indeed  to  cause  symptoms  other 
than  those  of  slight  dyspepsia. 

Whatever  may  be  the  cause  of  the  attack,  the  diet  should  be  light 
and  unirritating,  and  it  is  generally  advisable  to  reduce  the  amount 
of  fats,  or  even  to  recommend  the  temporary  discontinuance  of  butter 
and  of  all  forms  of  fat.  Patients  can  often  readily  take  farinaceous 
food  without  any  discomfort,  while  the  use  of  animal  food  may  some- 
times promote  dyspeptic  symptoms ;  hence,  it  is  better-,  especially  in 
severe  cases,  to  advise  the  discontinuance  of  meat,  and  to  recom- 
mend the  use  of  beef -tea  and  of  light,  nourishing  broths.  The  dys- 
peptic symptoms  may  to  some  extent  be  controlled  by  these  modi- 
fications of  diet,  but  in  addition  it  may  be  well  to  use  alkaline  and 


300  HEPATIC  DISEASES. 

sedative  preparations,  such  as  sodium  bicarbonate,  or  compounds  of 
bismuth  and  diluted  hydrocyanic  acid. 

Of  more  distinct  value  are  the  measures  by  which  the  amount  of 
liquid  which  reaches  the  liver  may  be  reduced  ;  thus,  by  the  em- 
ployment of  cathartics,  which  stimulate  peristalsis,  it  will  be  found 
that  the  contents  of  the  intestine  are  hurried  onward  without  allow- 
ing time  for  the  absorption  of  liquid,  and  the  amount  of  liquid  in 
the  portal  system  may  thus  to  some  extent  be  controlled.  Saline 
purgatives,  for  instance,  when  given  in  concentrated  solution,  are 
found  to  have  the  power  of  reducing  markedly  the  quantity  of  fluid 
in  the  portal  circulation.  It  is  now  known  that  most  saline  purga- 
tives tend  to  form  a  solution  of  the  strength  of  6  per  cent,  within 
a  short  time  after  they  have  been  administered  ;  hence,  if  given  with 
a  greater  proportion  of  water,  some  of  this  fluid  will  be  absorbed, 
while,  if  employed  in  more  concentrated  form,  the  saline  tends  to 
abstract  water  from  the  intestinal  vessels,  and  will  thus  reduce  the 
liability  to  portal  congestion.  When,  however,  salines  are  given  in 
concentrated  form,  their  action  is  somewhat  slower  than  when  freely 
diluted. 

Other  remedies  which  favor  free  catharsis  may  be  of  great  service. 
A  treatment  that  is  frequently  followed  is  the  administration  of  a 
grain  of  calomel  at  bedtime,  together  with  euonymin  or  a  small 
amount  of  podophyllin,  and  the  action  is  often  hastened  by  the 
administration  of  a  saline  draught  on  first  waking.  Some  practi- 
tioners prefer  the  employment  of  effervescent  preparations,  such  as 
the  effervescent  magnesium  sulphate,  or  effervescent  sodium  phos- 
phate ;  after  these  remedies  have  been  used  in  the  morning,  comfort 
may  be  even  further  increased  and  the  action  may  be  favored  by 
the  use  of  alkaline  effervescent  draughts  at  short  intervals  during 
the  day.  The  following  is  a  favorite  mixture  for  "  sluggish  liver 
and  indigestion :" 


R. — Acidi  nitrochlorici  diluti 
Eesinse  podophylli 
Extract!  taraxici  fluid!   . 
Tincturse  nucis  vomicae   . 
Syrupi  zingiberis    . 
Aquse  menthfe  piperitse  . 

S. — In  water  three  times  a  day. 


3SS. 

s.  ad     §ss. 


When  an  attack  of  congestion  of  the  liver  tends  to  become  chronic, 
some  modifications  of  the  course  of  treatment  will  be  advisable, 


CONGESTION  OF  THE  LIVER.  301 

although  these  modifications  are  comparatively  slight.  The  chief 
alteration  is  connected  with  the  amount  of  exercise  that  is  to  be 
taken.  Certain  forms  of  chronic  hepatic  congestion  benefit  from 
active  exercise,  while  with  acute  congestion  greater  improvement 
usually  follows  rest.  The  exercise  must  be  adapted  to  the  age  and 
to  the  circumstances  of  the  individual,  and  to  some  extent  it  must 
depend  upon  his  general  physique.  For  patients  who  are  abnor- 
mally stout,  gradually  increasing  walking  exercise  will  give  the  best 
results  as  the  breathing-power  improves.  When,  however,  circum- 
stances permit,  riding  is  preferable,  since,  during  the  necessary  active 
movements  of  the  body,  the  circulation  in  the  viscera  is  facilitated, 
and  the  tendency  to  constipation  is  diminished.  Many  patients  with 
chronic  hepatic  congestion  derive  benefit  from  massage  and  from  the 
use  of  baths.  The  cold  douche  applied  over  the  region  of  the  liver 
is  frequently  of  great  service,  and  often  even  more  beneficial  is  the 
alternation  of  heat  and  cold  known  as  the  douche  eoossaise,  so  largely 
employed  at  balneological  establishments,  when  a  current  of  hot 
water,  under  considerable  pressure,  is  projected  from  a  distance  over 
the  surface  of  the  body  while  the  patient  stands  under  a  cold  shower 
bath. 

Frequently,  in  addition  to  the  value  of  the  baths,  benefit  will 
follow  a  course  of  treatment  at  a  hydropathic  establishment,  where 
the  modifications  of  diet  and  the  use  of  waters  with  mild  purgative 
properties  exert  considerable  influence  over  the  hepatic  circulation. 
Should  the  circumstances  of  the  patient  not  permit  the  adoption  of 
these  measures,  it  will  be  necessary  for  him  to  attend  closely  to  the 
action  of  the  bowels,  and  to  favor  some  laxity  of  action  by  the 
employment  of  mild  saline  purgatives,  or  the  occasional  use  of  a 
pill  of  calomel  and  euonymin.  Cascara  sagrada  is  sometimes  of 
service  in  these  cases,  and  it  may  be  well  to  favor  daily  action  by 
the  frequent  administration  of  small  doses  of  the  solid  extract  of 
cascara  sagrada ;  while  greater  freedom  of  action  is  insured  by  the 
use  of  mercurial  preparations  once  or  twice  a  week.  Patients  with 
chronic  congestion  demand  the  same  precautions  with  regard  to  diet 
as  have  already  been  indicated  for  acute  congestion,  though  it  is 
rarely  necessary  to  insist  upon  their  being  restricted  to  liquid  diet. 


CHAPTER    XIII. 

HEPATIC   TtlSi:, ABES— Continued. 

Cirrhosis — Hgematemesis — Melsena — Ascites — Cancer  of  the  Liver — Syphilitic  Dis- 
ease of  the  Liver — Lardaceous  Disease  of  the  Liver— Acute  Yellow  Atrophy  of 
the  Liver — Abscess  of  the  Liver  ;  Tropical ;  Pyfemic — Suppurative  Pylephlebitis 
— Fatty  Liver. 

Cirrhosis.  Although  it  is  needless  here  to  enter  at  length  into 
the  etiology  and  pathology  of  cirrhosis,  it  will  be  necessary  to  touch 
briefly  upon  these  subjects,  since  the  symptoms  are  so  largely  de- 
pendent upon  the  stage  of  the  disease  and  also  to  a  slight  extent 
upon  its  causation.  In  the  majority  of  cases  the  treatment  of  cir- 
rhosis has  to  be  guided  by  the  prominent  symptoms,  since  it  is  im- 
possible by  the  administration  of  drugs,  or  by  any  modification  of 
diet,  to  influence  materially  the  morbid  process  occurring  in  the 
liver.  The  symptoms,  however,  which  call  for  treatment  are  of  two 
distinct  varieties  :  obstructive  and  toxic.  The  symptoms  belonging 
to  the  former  group  are  the  more  important  and  more  easily  dealt 
with  than  those  of  the  latter. 

The  term  "  obstructive "  indicates  that  the  symptoms  depend 
upon  an  interference  with  the  circulation  as  the  result  of  the  over- 
growth of  fibrous  tissue  in  the  liver.  The  hepatic  terminations  of 
the  portal  vein  are  pressed  upon  and  engorgement  results  in  various 
organs.  Although  it  is  impossible  by  treatment  to  influence  the 
hepatic  circulation  directly,  or  to  favor  the  freedom  with  which  the 
blood  passes  from  the  portal  vein  through  the  liver,  it  is  possible  to 
favor  the  return  of  venous  blood  to  the  heart  through  other  chan- 
nels, and  the  efforts  of  the  physician  are  largely  concerned  with  min- 
imizing the  troubles  resulting  from  interference  with  the  circulation, 
pending  the  establishment  of  greater  freedom  of  collateral  circula- 
tion. It  is  important  to  remember  that  many  cases  of  cirrhosis, 
when  judiciously  managed,  will  go  through  three  distinct  stages. 
During  the  first  the  patient  suffers  from  the  impeded  circulation 
through  the  portal  system,  and  this  stage  of  suffering  may  be  fol- 
lowed by  a  second  stage  of  variable  duration,  during  which  com- 
pensation has,  to  a  certain  extent,  been  effected ;  and  the  third  or 


CIRRHOSIS.  303 

final  stage  is  marked  by  the  ultimate  failure  o£  compensation  and 
the  rapid  increase  of  urgent  symptoms.  In  dealing  with  the  first 
stage  of  cirrhosis,  therefore,  efforts  should  be  directed  mainly  toward 
promoting  comfort  pending  the  establishment  of  the  second  stage. 

One  of  the  earliest  indications  of  this  disease  is  to  be  found  in 
disturbance  of  the  digestive  functions.  There  is  frequently  some 
nausea  and  vomiting,  as  well  as  some  gastric  and  intestinal  catarrh. 
The  catarrh  is  sometimes  due  to  the  habits  of  alcoholism,  which 
form  the  foundation  of  cirrhotic  changes  in  the  liver  ;  but  when 
cirrhotic  changes  are  progressing,  symptoms  of  catarrh  may  arise, 
even  though  the  patient  may  have  long  given  up  alcoholic  habits, 
since  the  catarrh  then  results  from  passive  engorgement  of  the 
branches  of  the  portal  vein  within  the  stomach  and  the  upper  part 
of  the  small  intestine.  To  some  extent  it  is  possible  to  treat  these 
symptoms  of  gastric  and  intestinal  catarrh  as  they  arise,  but  in  gen- 
eral the  employment  of  a  modified  diet  and  even  of  gastric  sedatives 
will  be  of  little  service,  unless  it  is  carefully  remembered  that  the 
impeded  portal  circulation  is  at  the  root  of  the  symptoms.  Occa- 
sionally the  intestinal  catarrh  is  marked  by  frequent  action  or  irreg- 
ular action  of  the  bowels,  and  it  is  generally  advisable  not  to  attempt 
to  check  this  symptom  by  astringents,  since  these  would,  in  all  prob- 
ability, tend  further  to  embarrass  the  portal  circulation.  Indeed, 
when  diarrhoea  is  absent,  it  is  generally  desirable  to  promote  fre- 
quency of  action  of  the  bowels  by  the  employment  of  saline  or  of 
hydragogue  purgatives. 

While  thus  modifying  the  treatment  of  gastritis  and  enteritis,  it 
is  important  not  to  neglect  the  ordinary  principles  of  treatment. 
ISTausea  and  vomiting  may  be  diminished  by  gastric  sedatives,  and 
it  is  always  well,  when  these  symptoms  are  present,  to  regulate  the 
diet  accordingly. 

A  symptom  of  frequent  occurrence  in  connection  with  the  stomach 
is  hemorrhage,  which  may  be  recognized  either  by  the  gradual  dark- 
ening of  the  motions — that  is,  melsena — or  by  distinct  attacks  of 
hsematemesis.  The  hsematemesis  due  to  cirrhosis  is  usually  but 
small  in  amount,  and  the  blood  is  frequently  of  a  dark-brown  color. 
Occasionally,  however,  the  hemorrhage  may  be  more  profuse,  so  that 
large  clots  or  even  large  quantities  of  fluid  blood  may  be  vomited. 
In  general,  the  heematemesis  of  cirrhosis  scarcely  requires  separate 
treatment ;  like  that  of  gastritis,  it  is  due  to  engorgement  of  the 
radicles  of  the  portal  vein,  and,  when  only  small  quantities  of  blood 


304  HEPATIC  DISEASES. 

are  being  brought  up  it  is  probable  that  the  minor  vessels  only  have 
ruptured  and  thus  permitted  slow  oozing.  It  is  obviously  impos- 
sible to  check  this  by  the  administration  of  astringents,  since  astrin- 
gents cannot  beneficially  influence  the  cause  of  the  engorgement  of 
the  radicles  of  the  portal  vein,  and,  indeed,  they  may  do  consider- 
able harm  by  increasing  the  tendency  to  gastritis.  Although  this 
symptom,  like  the  former,  is  to  be  treated  indirectly,  it  will  be 
necessary  to  insist  upon  absolute  rest  if  the  patient  is  not  already 
kept  in  bed  on  account  of  other  symptoms,  and,  in  general,  it  is 
advisable  to  use  remedies  or  measures  calculated  to  relieve  the 
portal  engorgement. 

Hsematemesis  in  connection  with  cirrhosis  may  occur  fairly  late 
in  the  disease  when,  in  addition  to  other  troubles,  there  is  much 
ascites,  and  occasionally  the  hsematemesis  will  improve  very  mark- 
edly with  the  measures  undertaken  for  the  relief  of  ascites,  it 
should  not  be  forgotten  that  when  there  is  a  large  accumulation  of 
fluid  within  the  peritoneal  cavity,  this  fluid,  by  its  pressure,  embar- 
rasses the  various  collateral  channels  through  which  relief  of  portal 
engorgement  is  ordinarily  to  be  effected.  I  have  often  seen  both 
hsematemesis  and  melsena  suddenly  stop  when  fluid  has  been  with- 
drawn from  the  peritoneal  cavity  for  the  relief  of  other  more  urgent 
symptoms. 

The  ascites  due  to  cirrhosis  varies  considerably  in  amount.  It  is 
almost  invariably  an  indication  for  keeping  the  patient  in  bed.  In 
the  early  days  after  the  recognition  of  ascites,  hydragogue  purga- 
tives are  commonly  employed,  such  as  the  compound  jalap  powder, 
or  jalap  powder  with  an  equal  part  of  scammony.  Occasionally 
stronger  purgatives,  such  as  elaterium,  are  used  ;  but  ordinarily  I 
prefer  to  avoid  this  remedy,  since,  in  spite  of  its  undoubted  action, 
it  is  somewhat  uncertain  in  its  results,  and  it  very  frequently  causes 
considerable  discomfort.  After  a  few  days  of  treatment  with  purga- 
tives, it  will  be  easy  to  determine  whether  the  ascites  is  increasing 
or  diminishing  in  amount,  and  any  alteration  in  this  respect  will 
furnish  valuable  indications  for  further  treatment.  Should  the 
ascites  appear  to  be  diminishing,  the  use  of  purgatives  should  be 
continued,  and  still  further  diminution  may  be  obtained  by  the  em- 
ployment of  diuretic  remedies.  When,  however,  in  spite  of  diuretics 
and  purgatives,  there  is  a  rapid  increase  in  the  peritoneal  accumu- 
lation, it  is  advisable  to  operate  as  soon  as  possible,  without  waiting 
for  symptoms  of  further  distress  arising  from  the  pressure  of  the 


CIRRHOSIS.  305 

fluid  upon  the  diaphragm,  and  the  consequent  interference  with  the 
action  of  the  heart. 

In  all  cases  of  ascites  early  tapping  is  advisable,  since,  by  the 
removal  of  fluid,  the  pressure  on  peritoneal  vessels  will  be  dimin- 
ished and  the  reabsorption  of  the  ascitic  fluid  will  be  favored,  while 
risks  of  further  effusion  will  be  rendered  less,  since  collateral  circu- 
lation may  be  established  more  easily.  Delay  in  performing  para- 
centesis is  likely  to  be  followed  by  a  speedy  reaccumulation  of  ascitic 
fluid,  and  by  the  need  of  more  frequent  operations  for  its  relief.  It 
was  at  one  time  recommended  that  the  ascitic  fluid  should  be  removed 
by  means  of  a  trocar  and  canula  ;  but  although  it  may  be  sometimes 
necessary  to  use  these  instruments,  it  is  now  far  more  usual  to  em- 
ploy one  of  Southey's  tubes,  connected  with  a  long  india-rubber 
tube  passing  into  a  basin,  or  a  bath,  underneath  the  bed,  which  per- 
mits of  the  gradual  slow  withdrawal  of  fluid,  and  diminishes  the 
risks  of  fainting,  or  of  collapse  due  to  the  sudden  alteration  of 
pressure.  Even  when  employing  Southey's  tubes,  however,  it  is 
desirable  to  give  a  small  quantity  of  brandy,  or  other  stimulant, 
since  faintness  is  frequently  complained  of  during  the  operation. 
The  site  to  be  punctured  is  first  thoroughly  cleansed  with  some 
antiseptic  lotion,  and  the  instruments  also  are  rendered  aseptic, 
usually  by  being  passed  through  the  flame  of  a  spirit  lamp. 

It  is  sometimes  advisable  to  employ  an  anaesthetic  locally — thus, 
for  example,  to  inject  cocaine,  or  to  diminish  the  cutaneous  sensi- 
bility by  cold,  either  by  means  of  an  ether  spray,  by  the  use  of  ice, 
or  of  ethyl  chloride.  Frequently,  however,  the  pain  of  introducing 
Southey's  tube  is  very  little  more  than  that  produced  by  the  intro- 
duction of  a  hypodermatic  syringe,  and  the  previous  employment  of 
a  local  anaesthetic  is,  therefore,  scarcely  necessary,  unless  the  fluid 
is  to  be  removed  with  a  trocar  and  canula. 

The  number  of  times  that  ascitic  fluid  may  require  to  be  removed 
varies  greatly ;  sometimes  within  a  few  days  the  accumulation  may 
re-form,  and  the  distress  of  breathing  may  necessitate  further  re- 
moval. Frequently,  however,  after  the  fluid  has  been  partially  or 
wholly  withdrawn,  the  tendency  to  recurrence  may  be  checked  by 
the  employment  of  purgatives  and  diuretics.  For  the  same  reasons 
that  have  already  been  given  for  early  operation,  it  is  desirable  to 
watch  reaccumulation s  closely.  Sometimes,  after  tapping  has  been 
necessary  on  three  or  four  occasions  at  intervals  of  two  or  three 
weeks,  the   tendency  to   accumulation   may    cease,   owing   to   the 

20 


306  HEPATIC  DISEASES. 

establishment  of  free  collateral  circulation.  It  was  at  one  time 
thought  that  the  arrest  of  ascites  in  these  cases  was  mainly  due  to 
some  thickening  or  other  alteration  in  the  peritoneum,  and  cer- 
tainly, after  repeated  ascites,  the  peritoneum  is  frequently  found  to 
be  more  opaque  and  less  smooth  than  usual.  This  is  more  likely 
to  be  the  case  when  the  fluid  removed  during  later  tappings  has 
become  more  opaque,  owing  to  the  presence  of  leucocytes.  Ordi- 
narily, when  proper  precautions  have  been  taken,  this  change  in  the 
appearance  of  ascitic  fluid  does  not  occur.  The  matting  together 
of  the  intestines  is  another  condition  to  which  the  arrest  of  ascites 
has  been  attributed,  but  this  condition  is  not  likely  to  arise  unless 
there  has  been  some  peritonitis. 

Frequently  there  may  be  oedema  of  the  feet,  and  this  is  especially 
likely  to  arise  when  patients  with  ascites  have  been  allowed  to  keep 
on  their  feet,  or  when  the  ascitic  fluid  is  large  in  amount.  Patients 
often  present  themselves  in  the  out-patient  room  with  both  ascites 
and  oedema  of  the  leg,  and  the  latter  symptom  frequently  disappears 
after  they  have  been  kept  in  bed  for  a  few  days. 

The  history  of  the  case  generally  shows  that  the  ascites  com- 
menced before  the  oedema  of  the  feet,  but  when  the  patient  is  very 
stout  the  oedema  may  occasionally  be  the  first  symptom  to  attract 
attention,  even  though,  in  all  probability,  it  is  consecutive  to  the 
accumulation  in  the  peritoneal  cavity.  Even  while  patients  are 
still  able  to  be  about,  the  extent  of  oedema  varies  greatly ;  it  is  gen- 
erally found  to  increase  toward  night,  but  sometimes,  especially 
after  attacks  of  diarrhoea,  there  may  be  great  improvement  so  far  as 
the  oedema  of  the  feet  is  concerned.  The  variations  in  oedema  from 
day  to  day,  or  when  the  patient  is  in  the  recumbent  posture,  are 
sufficiently  explained  by  the  cause  of  this  symptom.  It  results 
mainly  from  pressure  of  the  ascitic  fluid  upon  the  large  veins  and 
absorbent  vessels  passing  into  the  pelvis,  and  this  pressure  is  greatest 
when  the  patient  is  erect ;  a  comparatively  small  amount  of  fluid 
within  the  abdominal  cavity  may  then  be  sufficient  to  lead  to  oedema, 
while  in  the  recumbent  posture  the  pressure  is  more  evenly  distrib- 
uted, and  the  tendency  to  oedema  is  thus  reduced. 

It  is  very  rare  for  the  oedema  of  the  legs  to  call  for  special  treat- 
ment. Generally  it  diminishes  with  the  measures  adopted  for  the 
relief  of  the  ascites,  and  it  is  only  under  exceptional  circumstances 
that  it  is  ever  necessary  to  remove  fluid  from  the  legs  by  means  of 
Southey's  tubes,  by  acupuncture,  or  by  small    incisions,  such  as 


CIEBHOSIS.  307 

would  be  adopted  in  cases  of  dropsy  resulting  from  heart  or  kidney- 
disease.  It  is,  nevertheless,  necessary  in  dealing  with  ascites  to 
examine  the  lower  extremities  from  time  to  time,  and  to  note  altera- 
tions in  their  size.  Frequently,  as  with  other  conditions  leading  to 
oedema  of  the  legs  and  feet,  these  parts  may  become  cold,  owing  to 
the  imperfect  circulation  due  to  the  pressure  of  the  fluid  upon  the 
bloodvessels,  and  warmth  must  then  be  maintained  by  blankets  and 
hot-water  bottles.  In  using  the  latter  it  must  be  rememberd  that, 
as  in  other  cases  of  oedema,  the  cutaneous  sensibility  is  greatly  low- 
ered, and,  accordingly,  care  should  be  taken  to  prevent  actual  con- 
tact of  the  hot-water  bottle  with  the  limb. 

With  cirrhosis  a  slight  degree  of  jaundice  is  sometimes  observed, 
more  particularly  in  the  face  and  in  the  subconjunctival  tissues,  but 
practically  it  never  requires  special  treatment.  The  slight  character 
of  the  jaundice  is,  in  all  probability,  to  be  accounted  for  by  a  dim- 
inution in  the  amount  of  bile  formed,  rather  than  by  the  absence  of 
pressure  on  the  commencements  of  the  bile-ducts.  Although  in- 
tense jaundice  is  rare,  the  toxic  symptoms  to  be  described  below  are 
probably  due  to  the  interference  with  the  ordinary  functions  of  the 
liver,  owing  to  the  diminution  of  true  secreting  structure. 

With  cirrhosis  the  urine  frequently  undergoes  marked  alterations. 
Commonly  it  is  greatly  reduced  in  quantity,  and  this  reduction  is 
greatest  when  there  are  large  accumulations  of  ascitic  fluid.  The 
urine  is  not  only  reduced  in  amount,  but  it  becomes  more  highly 
concentrated  and  of  a  deeper  color,  and  there  is  great  tendency  to 
the  deposition  of  urates.  When  these  alterations  are  associated  with 
ascites  they  are  best  treated  by  the  measures  adopted  for  the  ascites. 
Short  of  the  removal  of  the  ascitic  fluid  by  operation,  it  is  diflicult 
to  materially  increase  the  amount  of  urine  passed.  Occasionally 
diuretics  are  of  service,  especially  those  which  influence  the  circu- 
lation through  the  kidney ;  digitalis  may  be  employed  with  this 
object,  but  the  chances  of  success  are  far  greater  when  the  intraperi- 
toneal pressure  has  been  reduced  by  operation.  During  the  early 
days  of  treatment,  after  the  patient  has  been  confined  to  bed,  some 
improvement  in  the  nature  of  the  urine  may  follow  the  administra- 
tion of  hydragogue  purgatives,  especially  when  under  their  influence 
the  amount  of  ascitic  fluid  shows  signs  of  diminution  ;  but  the 
greatest  alterations  in  the  urine  are  commonly  found  when,  after 
tapping,  hydragogue  purgatives  and  diuretics  are  simultaneously 
employed.      Under   these  conditions  the  diuretic   value  of  water 


308  HEPATIC  DISEASES. 

may  be  utilized,  although  prior  to  the  removal  of  ascites  some  hesi- 
tation may  have  been  felt  about  the  advisability  of  allowing  copious 
draughts  of  liquid.  As  already  indicated,  when  the  character  of 
the  urine  can  be  improved  and  its  quantity  increased,  the  chances  of 
beneficially  influencing  the  amount  of  ascites  are  also  increased. 

Frequently  in  the  course  of  cirrhosis  albumin  may  be  found  in 
the  urine,  and  it  may  be  difficult  to  determine,  until  the  patient  has 
been  under  observation  for  a  prolonged  period,  whether  this  albu- 
minuria is  the  result  of  passive  engorgement  of  the  kidney,  or 
whether  it  is  indicative  of  a  form  of  nephritis  associated  with  the 
cirrhosis.  Ordinarily,  the  albumin  diminishes  in  amount  with  the 
improvement  of  the  ascites,  and  it  may  entirely  disappear  as  collat- 
eral circulation  becomes  established. 

Hitherto  attention  has  been  mainly  directed  to  the  symptoms 
arising  during  the  first  stage  of  cirrhosis,  before  the  establishment 
of  collateral  circulation  sufficient  to  counteract  the  obstruction  to 
the  circulation  within  the  liver.  Under  favorable  circumstances 
the  measures  above  described  will  be  attended  with  success,  and 
occasionally  patients  who  have  had  considerable  ascites  and  oedema 
when  first  coming  under  treatment,  improve  so  far  that  even  though 
they  are  allowed  to  be  up  and  about  these  symptoms  do  not  return. 
Caution  must  be  exercised  in  allowing  a  patient  who  has  had  severe 
symptoms  to  leave  his  bed,  and  the  difficulty  of  decision  in  this 
question  lies  in  the  fact  that  frequently,  if  kept  in  bed  too  long,  the 
appetite  and  general  strength  will  fail,  while  improvement  might 
:follow  with  exercise  and  fresh  air.  The  results,  therefore,  of  allow- 
ing the  patient  to  leave  his  bed  must  be  carefully  watched,  and  any 
Teturn  of  oedema,  or  of  ascites,  will  serve  as  an  indication  for  once 
more  assuming  the  recumbent  posture. 

During  the  second  stage  of  cirrhosis,  the  treatment  should  be 
-mainly  directed  toward  the  improvement  of  general  nutrition  and 
:alleviation  of  urgent  symptoms.  With  these  objects  it  will  be 
necessary  to  employ  tonics  such  as  quinine  and  iron,  while  small 
quantities  of  nux  vomica,  or  of  the  strychninse  hydrochlorate,  may  be 
given  if  the  appetite  does  not  improve.  The  condition  of  the  bowels 
will  demand  attention,  since,  during  the  second  stage  of  cirrhosis, 
attacks  of  diarrhoea  may  alternate  with  a  general  tendency  to  con- 
stipation. A  little  diarrhoea  may  not  do  any  material  harm,  but  if 
the  symptom  continues,  and  if  four  to  five  motions  or  more  are 
passed  in  the  twenty-four  hours,  they  will  probably  cause  much 


CIBEHOSIS.  309 

weakness  and  will  call  for  the  use  of  astringents  and  intestinal  seda- 
tives. More  commonly  it  is  necessary  to  employ  saline  purgatives 
repeatedly,  to  increase  the  action  of  the  bowel. 

Perhaps  a  symptom  which  requires  most  frequent  treatment  dur- 
ing the  second  stage  of  cirrhosis  is  the  dyspepsia,  which  continues 
even  after  collateral  circulation  has  to  a  great  extent  been  estab- 
lished. The  symptoms  of  dyspepsia  may  be  alleviated  by  the  use 
of  the  tonic  remedies  already  mentioned,  such  as  quinine,  acids,  and 
nux  vomica ;  but  the  temptation  to  employ  bismuth  is  very  great, 
and  occasionally,  when  given  in  conjunction  with  diluted  hydro- 
cyanic acid,  bismuth  subcarbonate,  subnitrate,  or  salicylate,  will  be 
found  to  be  of  some  service.  The  value  of  these  remedies  will 
depend  upon  the  extent  to  which  the  dyspeptic  symptoms  are  due 
to  continued  irritation  of  the  stomach  by  alcohol  or  by  indigestible 
articles  of  diet.  When  the  occurrence  of  gastritis  can,  even  in  part, 
be  attributed  to  such  causes,  these  sedatives  will  be  extremely  use- 
ful ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  when  the  inefficient  work  of  the  stomach 
is  due  mainly  to  impeded  circulation  through  the  portal  system, 
gastric  sedatives  are  of  very  little  service,  and  the  best  treatment 
that  can  be  followed  consists  in  the  use  of  tonic  remedies,  and  the 
occasional  employment  of  alkalies  or  of  pepsin  to  relieve  the  main 
results  of  the  gastritis. 

When  there  is  any  history  of  syphilis,  potassium  iodide  and  mer- 
curial preparations  may  be  employed,  during  either  the  first  or  the 
second  stage  of  cirrhosis.  In  syphilitic  cases  these  drugs  may  pre- 
vent further  changes  within  the  liver ;  but  when  cirrhosis  has  been 
fairly  established — that  is,  when  there  is  distinct  overgrowth  of 
fibrous  tissue  within  the  liver,  encroaching  upon  the  hepatic  cells 
— no  drugs  can  control  this  new-growth  and  lead  to  the  formation 
of  fresh  glandular  tissue.  During  the  second  stage  the  amount 
of  urine  passed  should  be  carefully  watched,  since  any  diminution 
in  the  urinary  secretion  is  likely  to  be  followed  by  a  return  of  ascites  ; 
whenever  there  is  any  marked  diminution  in  the  daily  excretion  of 
urine,  or  whenever  there  appears  to  be  undue  concentration,  as  indi- 
cated by  the  deposition  of  urates,  it  is  advisable  to  employ  diuretic 
remedies.  Tincture  of  digitalis  may  be  added  to  the  tonic  mixtures 
which  these  patients  are  so  often  instructed  to  take  from  time  to 
time.  As  Sir  R.  Douglas  Powell,  in  his  Lumleian  Lectures,  indi- 
cates, "  there  is  a  great  advantage  in  not  prescribing  too  large  a  dose 
at  first,  since  this  is  liable  to  be  followed  by  premature  arterial  con- 


310  HEPATIC  DISEASES. 

traction  and  cumalative  effects."  ^  He  points  out  that  with  the 
appearance  of  these  physiological  symptoms,  the  drug  should  be 
stopped  and  some  other  medicine  substituted  until  the  pulse  again 
calls  for  its  administration,  and  he  therefore  advocates  the  employ- 
ment of  moderate  doses.  When  the  patient  is  kept  at  rest,  he  con- 
siders that  10  minims  of  the  tincture  should  be  given  every  four 
hours,  or  15  minims  every  eight  hours. 

In  the  above  remarks  Sir  R.  Douglas  Powell  is  speaking  of  the 
value  of  digitalis  in  connection  with  heart  disease,  and  he  notes  that 
under  these  circumstances  it  generally  takes  about  three  days  before 
the  pulse  is  under  control  and  the  urine  begins  to  increase.  When 
employing  digitalis,  however,  for  a  patient  who  is  not  confined  to 
his  bed,  it  is  advisable  to  employ  smaller  doses  than  the  above,  and, 
as  a  rule,  it  is  better  to  commence  with  the  minimum  dose  of  5  min- 
ims, carefully  watching  the  influence  on  the  pulse,  as  well  as  on  the 
urinary  secretions.  Should  the  pulse,  after  becoming  slow,  exhibit 
small  intermittent  beats,  digitalis  should  be  discontinued  for  a  few 
hours,  or  the  dose  should  be  reduced.  When  digitalis  disagrees  and 
favors  dyspeptic  symptoms,  or  even  vomiting,  it  is  advisable  to  use 
squill.  The  tincture  of  squill  appears  to  have  more  diuretic  action 
than  digitalis,  and  when  there  is  no  primary  weakness  of  the  circu- 
lation this  can  be  given  in  doses  of  from  5  to  15  minims,  three  times 
a  day  ;  or,  on  the  other  hand,  when  the  digitalis  is  not  producing  any 
ill  results,  the  syrup  of  squill,  in  doses  of  from  f  to  1  fluidrachm, 
may  be  added  to  the  mixture  containing  digitalis,  to  increase  its 
activity. 

Other  diuretics  may  be  used  from  time  to  time,  such  as  potassium 
nitrate  or  the  spirit  of  nitrous  ether,  either  of  which  can  be  conve- 
niently added  to  prescriptions  containing  tincture  of  digitalis  or 
tincture  of  squill.  The  presence  of  free  acid  in  the  syrup  of  squill 
would,  however,  prevent  the  administration  of  the  latter  with  spirit 
of  nitrous  ether. 

The  treatment  during  the  third  stage  of  cirrhosis  when  compen- 
sation is  failing  does  not  differ  materially  from  that  suitable  for  the 
first  stage.  The  ascites  is  likely  to  be  more  marked  and  the  weak- 
ness will  be  greater,  but  the  various  symptoms  will  still  require  to 
be  dealt  with  on  the  principles  already  described.  It  is  during  the 
third  stage  that  the  toxic  symptoms  most  commonly  occur.     These 

^  Treatment  in  Diseases  and  Disorders  of  the  Heart,  p.  72. 


CANCER  OF  THE  LIVER.  311 

symptoms  are  frequently  mistaken  for  uraemia,  since  they  are  very 
often  marked  by  coma  or  stupor,  and  sometimes  by  convulsions. 
Occasionally  these  cerebral  symptoms  may  be  interrupted  or  re- 
placed by  delirium  of  a  noisy  type.  It  must  be  admitted  that  the 
treatment  of  these  toxic  symptoms  is  extremely  unsatisfactory, 
since  their  explanation  has  not  been  finally  reached.  They  may 
occur  independently  of  any  suppression  of  urine  or  of  any  marked 
diminution  in  the  excretion  of  nitrogenous  waste.  Similarly  they 
do  not  appear  to  be  the  result  of  jaundice,  or  even  of  the  absorption 
of  bile.  Sometimes  it  has  been  thought  that  these  symptoms  have 
been  favored  when  alcohol  has  been  administered  on  account  of  the 
weakness  of  the  pulse ;  but  toxic  symptoms  have  been  frequently 
noted  in  patients  who  have  been  under  observation  for  a  length  of 
time  without  the  administration  of  alcohol.  It  would  appear  more 
probable  that  these  toxic  symptoms  are  directly  attributable  to  the 
increasing  interference  with  the  functions  of  the  liver.  When  de- 
lirium is  present,  and  when  the  urine  is  not  much  reduced  in  quan- 
tity, it  is  desirable  to  check  restlessness  by  the  frequent  hypodermatic 
injection  of  morphine.  Sometimes,  however,  in  addition  to  this 
treatment,  it  is  desirable  to  give  small  doses  of  alcohol  repeatedly, 
especially  when  the  pulse  is  rapid  and  irregular.  In  a  recent  case 
under  my  care,  temporary  improvement  followed  the  intravenous 
injection  of  saline  solution.  It  must  be  admitted,  however,  that 
when  toxic  cerebral  symptoms  arise,  the  end  is,  as  a  rule,  not  far  off. 
Cancer  of  the  Liver.  It  is  necessary  to  say  a  few  words  on  the 
treatment  of  cancer  of  the  liver,  although,  as  in  many  other  affec- 
tions of  this  organ,  the  treatment  has  to  be  entirely  symptomatic, 
since  no  remedies  can  influence  the  development  of  fresh  nodules, 
or  the  rapidity  of  their  growth ;  the  utmost,  therefore,  that  can  be 
attempted  is  to  treat  the  various  symptoms  as  they  arise,  and  to 
render  the  natural  progress  of  the  disease  as  painless  as  possible. 
The  symptoms  connected  with  cancer  of  the  liver  are  extremely 
various,  since  they  so  largely  depend  upon  the  portion  of  the  liver 
affected  and  upon  the  extent  to  which  the  new  growth  interferes 
with  the  circulation  or  with  the  functions  of  other  organs.  When 
the  new-growths  develop  toward  the  centre  of  the  liver  they  may 
attain  considerable  size  before  giving  rise  to  any  symptoms.  As 
they  approach  the  surface  and  involve  the  capsule,  they  will  com- 
monly give  rise  to  pain,  particularly  if  the  portion  affected  is  sub- 
mitted to  frequent  alterations  of  position.     Nodules  may  form  close 


312  HE  FA  TIC  DISEASES. 

to  the  diaphragm  and  be  comparatively  devoid  of  pain,  but  when 
they  affect  the  anterior  margin  of  the  liver,  which  is  subject  to  fre- 
quent gliding  movements,  pain  will  probably  be  a  very  prominent 
symptom.  When  the  nodules  grovs^  toward  the  under  surface  of  the 
liver,  more  particularly  when  they  press  toward  the  transverse 
fissure,  the  comparatively  quiescent  period  is  at  an  end,  and  the 
symptoms  become  much  more  marked  and  more  severe.  These 
symptoms  are,  in  the  first  place,  due  to  pressure  upon  the  common 
bile-duct,  and  to  obstruction  which  leads  to  jaundice,  frequently  of 
a  persistent  type.  The  jaundice  with  carcinoma  of  the  liver  is  not 
only  persistent,  but  it  gradually  deepens,  although  it  may  be  sub- 
ject to  fluctuation.  In  addition  to  jaundice,  ascites  may  frequently 
result  from  pressure  upon  the  portal  vein,  and,  as  in  cirrhosis,  may 
lead  to  interference  with  the  functions  of  the  stomach  and  intes- 
tines, in  consequence  of  the  obstruction  to  the  circulation.  As  in 
cirrhosis,  therefore,  gastric  symptoms  may  arise,  nausea,  dyspepsia, 
flatulence,  and  even  vomiting  and  haematemesis,  the  latter  being 
occasionally  associated  with  melsena,  either  from  the  onward  passage 
of  blood  from  the  stomach  to  the  intestine,  or  from  passive  effusion 
from  the  vessels  in  the  duodenum. 

The  various  symptoms,  therefore,  of  cancer  of  the  liver  may  be 
conveniently  grouped  as  gastric  symptoms,  ascites,  jaundice,  and 
pain,  and  the  treatment  of  these  symptoms  in  no  way  differs  from 
the  treatment  of  similar  symptoms  occurring  in  connection  with 
cirrhosis.  The  frequency  of  pain  will,  however,  necessitate  the  use  of 
sedative  remedies.  The  pain  is  often  so  intense  as  to  interfere  with 
sleep,  and  even  during  the  waking  hours  it  may  largely  contribute 
to  the  imperfect  nutrition  which  is  such  a  marked  feature  of  this 
disease,  quite  regardless  of  the  occurrence  of  gastric  symptoms. 
Hence,  pain  demands  the  frequent  employment  of  opium  and  of 
morphine,  and  inasmuch  as  these  cases  are  hopeless  from  the  begin- 
ning, there  need  be  no  hesitation  in  employing  these  remedies  repeat- 
edly, since  the  fatal  nature  of  cancer  of  the  liver  does  not  admit  of 
the  subsequent  establishment  of  the  opium  or  morphine  habit. 

Sometimes,  after  there  has  been  long  complaint  of  pain,  the  use 
of  opiates  is  scarcely  essential,  since  a  stage  of  toleration  may  be 
established ;  at  any  rate,  one  often  sees  cases  in  which  fomentations 
of  opium  or  of  belladonna  are  sufficiently  sedative  to  enable  the  in- 
ternal use  of  morphine  or  of  opium  to  be  discontinued.  When  there 
is  complaint  of  considerable  pain,  these  fomentations  should  always 


CANCER  OF  THE  LIVER.  313 

be  employed  in  addition  to  the  internal  nse  of  opium  or  of  morphine, 
and  they  should  be  continued  alone  when  the  pain  shows  any  sign 
of  subsidence.  It  should  be  remembered  that  the  pain  of  cancer  of 
the  liver  is  liable  to  be  increased  by  frequent  manipulation  of  the 
liver ;  hence,  when  the  diagnosis  has  been  made,  there  is  distinct 
disadvantage  in  frequent  examination  of  the  new-growths. 

With  regard  to  the  jaundice  of  carcinoma,  the  measures  described 
in  connection  with  obstructive  jaundice  are  of  no  use  with  carci- 
noma ;  it  is  hopeless  to  attempt  measures  intended  to  diminish 
jaundice  or  even  to  relieve  obstruction  of  the  common  bile-duct. 
The  utmost  that  can  be  done  is  to  attend  to  the  action  of  the  bowels 
and  to  employ  remedies  calculated  to  supply  the  deficiency  of  bile. 
These  have  already  been  detailed  in  connection  with  obstructive 
jaundice.  To  a  great  extent  they  consist  in  the  employment  of 
saline  purgatives  and  in  the  occasional  use  of  intestinal  antiseptics 
and  carminatives. 

In  connection  with  carcinoma  of  the  liver,  special  care  must  be 
taken  to  avoid  the  formation  of  bed-sores,  since  these  patients,  from 
their  weakness,  from  the  size  of  the  hepatic  tumor,  and  from  the 
ascitic  accumulations,  are  extremely  likely  to  remain  in  one  position, 
on  their  back. 

Frequently  during  the  progress  of  carcinoma  of  the  liver  some 
pyrexia  of  a  mild  type  occurs,  the  temperature  ranging  from  100° 
to  101°,  or  102°,  and  the  pyrexia,  when  it  assumes  this  continuous 
form,  is  rarely  amenable  to  treatment.  Sometimes  the  course  of  the 
temperature  is  less  regular,  being  interrupted  by  great  fluctuations 
associated  with  rigors.  These  symptoms  are  frequently  indications 
of  suppuration  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  nodules,  or  at  least  of 
inflammatory  processes  originating  in  the  irritation  caused  by  their 
pressure.  Rigors,  however,  occur  occasionally  when  no  anatomical 
cause  can  subsequently  be  discovered.  With  rigors,  fairly  large 
doses  of  quinine  should  be  administered :  5  grains  may  be  given 
three  times  a  day,  and,  should  there  be  any  tendency  to  nausea  or 
vomiting,  the  quinine  may  be  conveniently  given  in  an  effervescent 
form,  from  J  drachm  to  1  drachm  of  citric  acid  serving  to  dissolve 
the  quinine  and  to  allow  a  sufficient  quantity  of  free  acid  to  give 
brisk  effervescence  on  being  added  to  the  alkaline  solution.  Another 
symptom  which  may  appear  to  call  for  treatment  is  the  occasional 
oedema  of  the  feet  and  legs.  This  rarely  results  from  the  pressure 
of  fluid  in  the  peritoneal  cavity ;  far  more  frequently  it  is  due  to 


314  HE  PA  TIC  DISEA  SES. 

ansemia.  Beyond  the  administration  of  tonic  preparations  and  com- 
pounds of  iron,  very  little  can  be  done  for  the  relief  of  this  symp- 
tom, unless  the  ascites  is  sufficiently  great  to  call  for  the  removal  of 
fluid. 

Syphilitic  Disease  of  the  Liver.  Syphilitic  disease  of  the  liver 
frequently  simulates  cirrhosis  of  the  liver,  and  inasmuch  as  the 
prognosis  in  the  former  is  much  the  more  favorable,  it  is  important 
to  recognize  the  diagnostic  indications.  The  disease  may  occur  in 
three  forms  :  the  first  is  a  diffuse  hepatitis,  the  form  commonly 
observed  in  congenital  syphilis.  In  this,  although  the  liver  is 
larger  than  usual,  owing  to  great  increase  of  connective  tissue  and 
small-celled  infiltration,  the  shape  is  not  materially  altered.  Sec- 
ondly, gummata  may  arise,  either  in  adult  life  or  during  childhood. 
The  size  of  the  gummata  varies  from  a  quarter  to  three-quarters  of 
an  inch  in  diameter,  but  both  smaller  and  larger  nodules  may  be 
found.  These  may  produce  considerable  deformity  and  lead  to  deep 
fissures,  composed  of  fibrous  tissue.  The  third  form  appears  to 
originate  in  the  fibrous  capsule  of  the  liver,  and  leads  to  an  increase 
in  the  connective  tissue  in  the  portal  canals. 

As  above  indicated,  the  symptoms,  especially  in  adults,  are  mainly 
those  of  cirrhosis.  The  jaundice  is  usually  not  well  marked,  but 
there  is  commonly  much  disturbance  of  the  digestive  system  and 
much  ascites.  The  diagnosis  mainly  depends  upon  the  irregular 
surface  of  the  liver  and  upon  the  presence  of  nodules  and  of  deep 
fissures  at  an  age  when  cancer  of  the  liver  appears  improbable. 

The  treatment  of  the  prominent  symptoms — the  pain,  vomiting, 
and  ascites — in  no  way  differs  from  the  treatment  of  these  symptoms 
in  connection  with  cirrhosis ;  but,  in  addition  to  the  ordinary  meas- 
ures adopted  for  their  relief,  it  is  advisable  to  employ  anti syphilitic 
remedies.  When  the  disease  occurs  in  early  life  and  appears  to  be 
congenital,  preparations  of  mercury  must  be  used  freely  ;  but  should 
it  develop  later  in  life,  it  will  also  be  necessary  to  use  potassium 
iodide  in  large  doses,  and  if  the  symptoms  show  no  signs  of  im- 
provement, it  will  be  advisable  to  discontinue  the  mercury  and  to 
increase  the  amount  of  potassium  iodide.  For  congenital  syphilis 
the  mercurial  ointment  is  commonly  the  most  convenient,  since  this 
can  be  applied  to  the  flannel  binder  worn  by  the  child,  and  the 
movements  of  the  body  will  affect  the  absorption  of  mercury  by 
the  skin,  its  volatilization,  and  its  further  absorption  through  the 
lung.     Although  this  mode  of  treatment  has  the  disadvantage  of 


LABDACEOUS  DISEASE  OF  THE  LIVER.  315 

uncleanliness,  it  has  the  advantage  of  being  easily  employed,  and 
hence  it  is  more  likely  to  be  carried  out  than  the  frequent  inunction 
of  mercurial  ointment  in  the  groin  or  in  the  axilla. 

Should  the  indications  of  syphilis  occur  while  the  child  is  being 
nursed,  antisyphilitic  remedies  given  to  the  mother  may  be  bene- 
ficial to  the  infant.  For  older  children  the  mercurial  ointment  is 
less  convenient  than  the  internal  administration  of  gray  powder. 
Gray  powder  must,  however,  be  used  somewhat  cautiously,  since  it 
may  cause  considerable  diarrhoea  if  given  in  overdoses  or  for  too 
long  a  period.  Frequently  a  grain  of  gray  powder  is  given,  with 
3  or  4  grains  of  white  sugar,  twice  or  three  times  a  day.  It  is 
unnecessary  here  to  enter  into  detailed  description  of  the  modes  of 
treating  syphilis  in  the  adult,  since  these  are  in  no  way  modified  by 
the  special  organs  affected.  The  rules  for  early  tapping  in  ascites 
and  for  the  subsequent  employment  of  cathartics  are  the  same, 
whether  the  ascites  is  due  to  cirrhosis  or  to  syphilitic  disease.  It 
remains  to  add  that  syphilitic  disease  of  the  liver  is  occasionally 
marked  by  more  pain  than  is  usually  present  in  cirrhosis,  this  pain 
being  especially  severe  as  the  degeneration  affects  the  capsule  and 
leads  to  perihepatitis.  Sometimes  the  inflammation  thus  caused 
may  be  sufficiently  severe  to  form  the  foundation  of  general  peri- 
tonitis. It  is  important,  therefore,  to  treat  the  pain  of  syphilitic 
disease  at  an  early  stage  by  counter-irritants  applied  over  the  site 
of  pain,  and  by  the  hypodermatic  use  of  morphine.  As  in  other 
cases  of  hepatic  pain,  benefit  usually  follows  the  use  of  hot  fomen- 
tations or  of  poultices,  either  of  which  may  be  sprinkled  with 
laudanum.  Should  general  peritonitis  arise,  the  treatment  will 
require  to  be  modified  accordingly.     (See  Peritonitis.) 

Lardaceous  Disease  of  the  Liver.  Lardaceous  disease  of  the 
liver,  or  amyloid  disease,  is  always  the  sequel  of  some  form  of 
chronic  suppuration,  and,  therefore,  must  be  considered  in  the  light 
of  one  of  the  side  phenomena  incidental  to  chronic  suppuration, 
rather  than  as  a  distinct  disease.  In  addition  to  this  dependency 
of  origin,  we  have  to  note  the  fact  that  considerable  lardaceous 
change  may  be  present  in  the  liver,  without  necessarily  leading  to 
any  distinctive  symptoms.  The  forms  of  chronic  suppuration  lead- 
ing to  lardaceous  changes  are  frequently  those  connected  with  tuber- 
cular disease,  either  of  bone  or  of  lung  tissue.  So  long  as  the  sup- 
puration in  connection  with  diseased  bone  has  not  appeared  exter- 
nally, lardaceous  disease  is  not  likely  to  arise ;   but  when  large 


316  HE  PATIO  DISEASES. 

abscesses  communicating  with  diseased  bone  have  formed,  and  have 
discharged  externally,  and  when,  from  the  situation  of  the  primary 
cause  of  suppuration,  the  discharge  is  difficult  to  arrest,  lardaceous 
disease  is  very  likely  to  arise.  Great  enlargement  of  the  liver  from 
this  form  of  degeneration  is  frequently  accompanied  by  similar 
alterations  in  the  size  and  in  the  structure  of  the  spleen.  Although 
generally  dependent  upon  suppuration  connected  with  tubercular 
changes,  lardaceous  disease  may  follow  suppuration  resulting  from 
syphilis,  and  here,  also,  one  of  the  factors  necessary  to  the  contrac- 
tion of  lardaceous  disease  appears  to  be  the  contamination  of  the 
abscess  cavity  with  air  and  with  the  germs  which  it  contains. 

Frequently  considerable  enlargement  of  the  liver  and  of  the  spleen 
may  have  occurred  before  attention  is  attracted  by  the  increased 
size  of  the  abdomen.  The  enlargement  is  commonly  painless  and 
does  not  interfere  with  the  work  of  the  liver,  either  with  regard  to 
the  secretion  of  bile,  or  with  the  freedom  of  circulation.  Hence, 
jaundice  and  ascites  are  generally  absent ;  and,  apart  from  the 
cachexia,  which  is  largely  due  to  the  prolonged  suppuration,  larda- 
ceous disease  possesses  no  special  features  of  its  own.  The  increase 
in  the  size  of  the  liver  may,  however,  be  very  considerable,  and  it 
may  cause  discomfort  either  by  pressing  on  other  abdominal  viscera, 
or  by  interfering  considerably  with  the  freedom  of  the  movements 
of  respiration.  The  smooth  surface  of  the  liver  and  its  rounded 
margin,  together  with  the  previous  history,  usually  leave  very 
little  doubt  about  the  diagnosis. 

Since  lardaceous  disease  of  the  liver  is  commonly  associated  with 
lardaceous  changes  in  the  vessels  of  other  organs,  it  is  desirable  to 
arrest  further  degeneration  at  the  earliest  possible  stage.  This  can 
only  be  effected  satisfactorily  by  dealing  with  the  cause  of  suppu- 
ration, by  correcting,  if  necessary,  the  syphilitic  cachexia  by  the 
administration  of  mercury  or  of  potassium  iodide,  and  by  dealing 
surgically  with  any  diseased  bone ;  for  example,  by  clearing  out 
tubercular  jomts,  by  removing  portions  of  necrosed  bone,  and  by 
the  free  use  of  antiseptic  measures  when  the  caries — as,  for  instance, 
in  caries  of  the  spine — does  not  appear  to  be  within  reach  of  more 
active  surgical  interference.  Under  these  modes  of  treatment,  the 
slighter  forms  of  lardaceous  disease  of  the  liver  or  spleen  may 
undergo  improvement,  and  the  liver  may  eventually  return  to  its 
normal  size  and  shape.  More  commonly,  however,  the  disease  is 
met  with  when  too  far  advanced  to  hope  for  such  good  results. 


ACUTE  YELLOW  ATROPHY  OF  THE  LIVER.  317 

Independently  of  the  adoption  of  surgical  measures  for  relief, 
some  benefit  may  be  occasionally  derived  from  the  employment  of 
iodine,  or  of  iodides,  and  this  improvement  may  occur  even  though 
there  may  be  no  suspicion  of  a  syphilitic  origin.  It  has  been  recom- 
mended that  ammonium  chloride  should  be  given  in  large  doses  (30 
grains)  in  this  disease.  I  have  often  tried  this  remedy,  and  have 
been  unable  to  satisfy  myself  that  it  possessed  any  power  of  con- 
trolling lardaceous  changes.  As  with  other  conditions  leading  to  or 
associated  with  chronic  suppuration,  benefit  may  sometimes  result 
from  prolonged  residence  at  the  seaside,  or  from  a  long  sea  voyage 
in  a  well-provisioned  ship  ;  but  all  of  these  measures  are  of  second- 
ary importance  compared  with  the  value  of  surgical  measures  for 
checking  suppuration. 

The  frequent  association  of  albuminuria  with  lardaceous  disease  of 
the  liver  is  commonly  an  indication  that  the  changes  have  affected 
the  glomerulus  and  other  vessels  of  the  kidney.  Occasionally,  how- 
ever, this  explanation  of  albuminuria  may  be  misleading.  I  have 
known  cases  where  the  albuminuria  resulted  from  pressure,  or  at 
least  where  the  diminution  of  pressure  was  followed  by  a  diminu- 
tion in  the  amount  of  albuminuria,  or  even  by  disappearance  of 
albumin  from  the  urine.  Similarly,  although  ascites  is  commonly 
absent,  I  have  seen  it  in  a  marked  form  in  a  child  who  had  a  con- 
siderable lardaceous  enlargement  of  the  liver.  In  this  patient  the 
ascites  was  preceded  by  oedema  of  the  lower  extremities,  which  per- 
sisted after  the  removal  of  fluid  from  the  abdominal  cavity.  The 
disease  originated  in  spinal  caries,  and  the  abscess  was  found  to  have 
obliterated  the  inferior  vena  cava.  Should  ascites  arise  in  the  course 
of  lardaceous  disease,  some  such  explanation  may  commonly  be 
found,  and  the  ascites  will  require  to  be  dealt  with  as  though  it 
were  entirely  dependent  upon  hepatic  cirrhosis. 

Acute  Yellow  Atrophy  of  the  Liver,  Happily  this  condition 
is  rare  ;  its  symptoms  are  severe,  and  it  appears  to  be  almost  inva- 
riably fatal.  The  few  cases  of  recovery  which  have  been  recorded 
seem  open  to  some  doubt  as  to  the  diagnosis.  The  prominent 
symptoms  are  those  of  gastroduodenal  catarrh  with  jaundice, 
which  within  a  few  days  may  be  followed  by  severe  cerebral  symp- 
toms— headache,  delirium,  and  sometimes  convulsions.  As  the 
cerebral  symptoms  develop  the  jaundice  increases,  and  the  case 
commonly  terminates  with  deep  coma.  Hemorrhage  into  the  skin, 
or  from  the  mucous  membranes,  frequently  occurs.     The  tempera- 


318  HEPATIC  DISEASES. 

ture  is  generally  low  until  the  final  rise  shortly  before  death.  In 
addition  to  the  presence  of  bile  pigment  in  the  urine,  leucin  and 
tyrosin  are  commonly  to  be  met  with.  From  the  commencement 
of  the  disease  the  size  of  the  liver  rapidly  diminishes.  The 
atrophy  results  from  rapid  fatty  degeneration  of  the  glandular 
tissue,  and  fatty  degeneration  may  also  simultaneously  affect  the 
cardiac  muscle. 

The  foregoing  short  account  of  the  symptoms  and  of  the  path- 
ology of  this  disease  sufficiently  indicates  the  hopelessness  of  treat- 
ment. As  in  other  cases  of  acute  jaundice,  saline  purgatives  are,  how- 
ever, generally  administered,  and  it  has  been  thought  that  under  the 
influence  of  repeated  doses  of  these  purgatives  the  cerebral  symptoms 
have  been  retarded,  or  even  averted.  With  the  onset  of  cerebral 
symptoms,  of  convulsions,  or  of  coma,  the  case  must  be  treated  as 
one  of  ursemia,  even  though  there  may  be  no  indications  of  marked 
interference  with  the  functions  of  the  kidney.  Sometimes  the  cere- 
bral symptoms  appear  to  be  reduced  in  severity  if  free  catharsis 
can  be  obtained  by  magnesium  sulphate,  and  also  if  the  action  of 
the  skin  can  be  stimulated  either  by  vapor  baths  or  by  the  wet 
pack.  The  rapid  increase  in  the  severity  of  the  symptoms  leaves, 
however,  very  little  hope  of  permanent  advantage  from  any  of  the 
above  measures.  In  treating  the  rare  cases  marked  by  high  tem- 
perature, quinine  and  other  antipyretic  remedies  are  indicated.  The 
newer  antipyretics,  such  as  antifebrin,  antipyrin,  and  phenacetin,  are, 
however,  not  wholly  devoid  of  risk,  since  they  may  interfere  con- 
siderably with  the  normal  functions  of  the  liver  and  may  contribute 
to  the  development  of  further  toxic  symptoms.  Quinine  may  be 
used  in  large  doses,  and  its  employment  is  sometimes  followed  by 
a  reduction  of  temperature.  The  symptoms  so  strongly  resemble 
those  produced  by  phosphorus  poisoning  that  there  appears  to  be  very 
little  reason  for  doubting  that  the  changes  in  acute  yellow  atrophy 
depend  upon  some  distinct  toxic  influence. 

Abscess  of  the  Liver.  Abscess  of  the  liver  occurs  in  two  forms 
Avhich  are  widely  separated  in  their  etiology,  in  their  symptoms,  and 
in  their  treatment.  The  first — tropical  abscess — is  commonly  of 
large  size  and  occurs  in  those  who  have  endured  some  of  the  discom- 
forts and  diseases  incidental  to  tropical  climates.  This  form  of  ab- 
scess can  generally  be  traced  to  an  acute  attack  of  dysentery.  The 
abscess  develops  comparatively  slowly,  and  is  often  painless.  The 
first  symptom  to  attract  attention  is  the  deterioration  of  health,  and 


ABSCESS  OF  THE  LIVER.  319 

this  may  be  closely  followed  by  a  sense  of  weight  and  discomfort 
in  the  region  of  the  liver.  Frequently  the  abscess  may  attain  con- 
siderable size  before  its  presence  is  recognized,  and  its  existence 
may  be  first  demonstrated  by  a  profuse  flow  of  pus  from  the  intes- 
tine, or  the  expectoration  of  pus  from  the  lung.  Tropical  abscess 
has  to  be  dealt  with  on  surgical  principles,  and  the  two  modes  of 
evacuation  above  mentioned  should  be  averted,  if  possible,  since 
they  almost  invariably  lead  to  prolonged  and  exhausting  suppura- 
tion. Tropical  abscess  sometimes  makes  its  way  toward  the  surface 
of  the  liver,  and,  as  it  involves  the  capsule,  it  may  lead  to  severe 
pain,  necessitating  the  employment  of  morphine.  This  pain  is,  how- 
ever, to  some  extent  an  indication  of  a  natural  conservative  process, 
since  it  is  commonly  accompanied  by  the  formation  of  inflammatory 
adhesions  between  the  capsule  of  the  liver  and  the  peritoneal  sur- 
face. These  adhesions  limit  the  movements  of  the  liver,  and  they 
also  diminish  the  risks  of  spontaneous  discharge  into  the  general 
peritoneal  cavity.  Occasionally  the  formation  of  adhesions  between 
the  liver  and  the  abdominal  wall  may  be  favored  by  the  application 
of  blisters  over  the  site  of  the  abscess.  It  must  be  remembered  that 
the  dangers  of  spontaneous  discharge  are  very  great ;  hence,  when 
the  diagnosis  of  tropical  abscess  has  been  made,  it  is  advisable  to 
seek  the  assistance  of  an  experienced  surgeon  at  an  early  date,  since 
even  the  surgical  treatment  of  this  disease  involves  many  difliculties 
and  dangers. 

The  second  variety  of  hepatic  abscess  is  that  in  which  numerous 
small  collections  of  pus  may  be  formed  in  the  liver.  Such  abscesses 
may  occur  as  the  result  of  septic  and  pysemic  processes,  and  they 
may  follow  the  condition  known  as  portal  pysemia,  where  the  infec- 
tive material  is  absorbed  from  some  ulcerated  portion  of  the  alimen- 
tary canal,  as,  for  example,  in  connection  with  appendicitis,  with  typh- 
litis, and  with  ulcerations  of  the  stomach,  the  large  intestine,  and 
even  the  rectum.  Numerous  small  abscesses  may  also  be  found 
along  the  course  of  the  bile-ducts  in  some  cases  of  gallstone.  This 
form  of  hepatic  abscess  constitutes  "  suppurative  pylephlebitis." 

With  multiple  abscess  the  symptoms  are  mainly  those  of  pysemia 
with  hepatic  symptoms  superadded ;  thus  the  temperature  is  some- 
what elevated,  and  frequently  it  oscillates  widely,  but,  as  a  whole, 
the  chart  does  not  conform  to  any  regular  type.  There  is  usually 
some  jaundice,  especially  in  those  cases  where  the  suppurative  pyle- 
phlebitis results  from  impacted  calculi ;  but  even  in  pysemic  cases 


320  HEPATIC  DISEASES. 

where  there  is,  as  a  rule,  no  direct  pressure  on  the  common  bile- 
duct,  jaundice  is  fairly  frequent,  and  doubtless  results  from  the 
reabsorption  of  bile  from  the  bile-ducts,  owing  to  irregular  pressure 
of  the  purulent  collection.  The  liver  itself  is  generally  evenly 
enlarged  and  tender  on  percussion  or  pressure,  but  the  enlargement 
rarely  attains  the  dimensions  exhibited  by  the  single  tropical  abscess. 

The  treatment  of  this  condition  is  extremely  unsatisfactory  unless 
the  symptoms  appear  to  originate  in  the  impaction  of  a  gallstone. 
Even  then,  however,  the  measures  to  be  adopted  are  those  calculated 
to  relieve  the  obstruction  (see  Gallstones),  and  neither  the  collections 
of  pus,  the  tenderness,  nor  the  temperature  can  be  dealt  with  directly 
by  any  surgical  measures.  These  collections  of  pus  may  be  suspected 
from  the  size  of  the  liver,  but  usually  they  are  so  numerous  and 
small  that  it  is  absolutely  impossible  to  attempt  to  evacuate  this 
form  of  hepatic  abscess.  More  commonly  the  existence  of  these 
multiple  hepatic  abscesses  may  be  scarcely  suspected  during  life. 
In  connection  with  pysemia,  however,  the  existence  of  multiple 
abscesses  becomes  more  certain  with  the  development  of  jaundice 
and  the  oscillations  of  temperature  above  referred  to.  Pysemic 
abscesses  rarely  attain  sufficient  size  to  enable  their  position  to  be 
diagnosed  ;  but  should  they  appear  to  be  near  the  surface  of  the 
liver,  they  may  occasionally  be  dealt  with  surgically.  As  a  rule, 
however,  with  pysemic  abscesses,  the  condition  is  so  desperate  that 
much  hesitation  will  be  experienced  about  performing  operations. 
The  general  treatment,  therefore,  will  resolve  itself  into  that  com- 
monly adopted  for  cases  of  pyaemia  or  septicaemia. 

Fairly  large  doses  of  quinine  may  be  administered  if  rigors  are 
present,  and,  even  independently  of  rigors,  5  grains  of  quinine  may 
be  given  three  or  four  times  a  day  in  an  effervescing  solution.  The 
strength  of  the  patient  must  be  maintained  by  a  suitable  dietary  of 
a  light  and  digestible  character,  while,  for  the  weakness  and  irregu- 
larity of  the  pulse,  it  will  often  be  necessary  to  employ  stimulants. 
These  should  be  given  in  frequent  small  doses  distributed  over  the 
twenty-four  hours,  though  the  total  amount  need  not  exceed  3  to  4 
ounces  of  brandy.  The  furred  condition  of  the  tongue  and  the 
irregular  action  of  the  bowels  will  call  for  the  use  of  purgatives. 
Small  doses  of  calomel,  J  grain  to  1  grain,  made  into  a  pill  with  ex- 
tract of  cascara  sagrada  and  compound  extract  of  colocynth,  may  be 
given  at  night,  and  the  action  of  the  mercurial  may  be  rendered 
more  rapid  and  less  irritating  by  administering  an  effervescent  saline 


FATTY  LIVER.  321 

draught  in  the  early  morning.  In  these  cases  the  employment  of 
glycerin  suppositories,  or  of  enemata  of  soap  and  warm  water,  of 
olive  oil,  or  of  glycerin,  will  be  of  very  little  service,  since  the  object 
is  to  clear  the  whole  course  of  the  bowel  rather  than  to  empty  the 
lower  portion.  In  some  form  of  pyaemia,  when  the  obstruction  to 
the  outflow  of  bile  is  not  so  complete,  diarrhoea  may  be  present  in- 
stead of  constipation ;  but  even  under  these  conditions  the  occa- 
sional employment  of  a  mercurial  will,  as  a  rule,  be  beneficial. 

Fatty  Liver.  The  two  forms  of  fatty  liver  are  fatty  infiltration 
and  fatty  degeneration,  the  latter  being  the  more  important,  since 
this  is  the  form  associated  with  cases  of  malignant  jaundice  and  of 
phosphorus  poisoning.  With  fatty  infiltration  the  causes  are  more 
various.  It  may  arise  in  connection  with  general  obesity,  and,  on 
the  other  hand,  it  may  occur  when  the  ordinary  processes  of  oxida- 
tion are  interfered  with,  as  in  phthisis,  in  cachexia  and  confirmed 
ausemia.  It  also  occurs  in  a  marked  form  with  chronic  alcoholism. 
The  symptoms  are  extremely  indefinite,  since  there  is  no  direct  in- 
terference with  the  portal  system,  and  no  distinct  obstruction  to  the 
outflow  of  bile.  Hence  ascites  is  absent,  notwithstanding  the  ex- 
treme size  which  fatty  livers  sometimes  attain ;  and  similarly, 
although  the  motions  may  sometimes  be  somewhat  light  in  color, 
jaundice  never  appears. 

It  is  impossible  in  this  place  to  give  a  detailed  account  of  the 
treatment  of  this  condition,  which  depends  upon  such  a  variety  of 
causes.  The  utmost  that  can  be  done  is  to  treat  the  cause — that  is, 
to  encourage  abstinence,  or  at  least  moderation,  in  those  who  are  in 
the  habit  of  indulging  in  alcohol  — to  adopt  measures  for  the  reduc- 
tion of  obesity — measures  which  must  include  not  only  a  modifica- 
tion of  diet,  but  increased  activity  of  body.  At  the  same  time  the 
general  nutrition  must  be  maintained,  and  the  prominent  symptoms 
in  cases  of  phthisis,  of  anaemia,  or  of  other  forms  of  cachexia,  must 
receive  appropriate  treatment. 


21 


CHAPTEK  XIV. 

EENAL   DISEASES. 

Lithuria — Uric    Acid   Gravel — Phosphaturia — Oxaluria — Hsematuria — Hsemoglo- 
binuria — Ghyluria — Albumiauria  — Reaal  Calculus — Pyelitis — Hydronephrosis. 

Lithuria.  Foremost  among  the  anomalies  of  the  urinary  secre- 
tion must  be  noted  the  tendency  to  the  deposit  of  uric  acid  and  of 
urates.  Of  the  two,  the  latter  is  by  far  the  more  common.  The 
urates  should  normally  be  held  in  suspension,  but  frequently,  in  acid 
urine,  owing  to  concentration,  or  owing  to  an  excess  of  urates,  these 
may  be  deposited  in  an  amorphous  form.  The  conditions  leading  to 
the  deposition  of  urates  are  very  numerous.  Sometimes  the  depo- 
sition may  be  the  result  of  conditions  which  differ  very  little  from 
the  normal  physiological  state,  and  the  cause  of  the  deposition  may 
often  lie  altogether  outside  the  body  ;  thus,  for  example,  it  is  scarcely 
to  be  regarded  as  an  indication  of  a  pathological  condition  when, 
owing  to  concentration  of  the  urine  produced  by  the  loss  of  fluid 
from  the  body  by  perspiration,  urates  are  deposited  during  hot 
weather.  Similar  precipitation  may,  however,  also  arise  in  connec- 
tion with  many  trifling  ailments,  especially  those  involving  variations 
of  the  temperature  of  the  body. 

During  dyspepsia,  urates  may  be  deposited  when  the  urine  is  acid, 
but  the  quantity  of  amorphous  deposit  is  commonly  greater  during 
febrile  attacks.  In  all  probability  the  deposit  is  largely  the  result 
of  concentration,  owing  to  the  over-action  of  the  skin  and  lungs. 
The  urates  deposited  in  this  way  are  mostly  red,  and  under  the 
microscope  they  are  found  to  consist  of  granular  masses  devoid  of 
characteristic  shape.  With  moderate  heat  the  deposit  will  dissolve, 
and  it  will  generally  re-form  as  the  urine  cools.  In  examining  highly 
concentrated  urine  directly  it  has  been  passed,  the  addition  of  testing 
reagents  may  suffice  to  cause  the  precipitation  of  amorphous  urates ; 
thus,  in  the  cold  nitric  acid  test  for  albumin,  urates  may  sometimes 
be  precipitated  at  the  line  of  junction  between  the  acid  and  the  urine. 
The  urates  found  under  these  circumstances  are,  according  to  Sir 
William  Roberts,  quadri- urates  of  potash,  soda,  and  ammonia,  and 
they  are  not  to  be  regarded  as  pathological  products. 

Free  uric  acid  may  sometimes  be  precipitated  in  the  urinary  pas- 


LITHUBIA.  323 

sages,  and,  in  America  and  England,  uric  acid  deposits  are  most 
common  among  those  who  live  too  freely.  This  precipitation  is 
especially  favored  when  the  urine  is  unduly  acid,  but  it  may  also 
ensue  from  insufficient  supply  of  food,  and  especially  from  an  in- 
sufficiency of  food  containing  mineral  salts ;  thus  it  is  particularly 
likely  to  arise  when  the  dietary  consists  principally  of  carbohy- 
drates, and  in  countries  where  the  diet  is  almost  entirely  farinaceous, 
not  only  is  uric  acid  gravel  frequent,  but  uric  acid  calculi  are  also 
extremely  common.  There  appears  to  be  some  evidence  in  favor 
of  the  assumption  that  the  deposit  of  uric  acid  is  retarded  by  the 
consumption  of  mineral  salts,  such  as  chloride  of  sodium.  The 
deposit  of  both  uric  acid  and  of  urates  will  be  favored  by  a  high 
degree  of  acidity  of  the  urine,  and  the  chief  point  of  interest  in 
comparing  these  two  conditions  lies  in  the  fact  that  uric  acid  may 
form  crystalline  concretions  before  leaving  the  body,  while  the 
urates  are  deposited  only  during  the  cooling  of  the  urine  after  it 
has  been  passed. 

Of  the  two  formations,  that  of  uric  acid  gravel  is  the  one  which 
requires  the  greater  consideration,  since  the  deposition  of  urates, 
occurring  as  it  does  outside  the  body,  can  be  regarded  as  an  indi- 
cation of  processes  occurring  within  the  body,  only  so  far  as  the 
urine  is  concerned,  and  does  not  commonly  call  for  special  treat- 
ment. The  deposition  of  urates  is  a  condition  which  may  often 
be  entirely  relieved  by  the  more  liberal  use  of  liquids  and  by  the 
occasional  administration  of  alkalies.  Many  persons,  from  one 
reason  or  another,  are  prone  to  take  too  little  fluid.  This  is  some- 
times done  to  avert  indigestion,  more  commonly  to  avoid  obesity, 
while  in  reality  both  of  these  conditions  may  be  favored  by  the 
sparing  use  of  liquids.  Hence,  although  this  deposition  is  in  itself 
of  little  importance,  it  will  serve  to  attract  attention  to  errors  of 
diet  which  might  otherwise  escape  observation. 

When  the  urates  are  found  in  connection  with  febrile  conditions, 
they  are  again  an  indication  for  an  increased  amount  of  liquid ;  but 
in  all  probability,  if  the  temperature  is  high,  the  urates  will  still  be 
precipitated,  as,  for  example,  in  many  cases  of  typhoid  fever  and 
pneumonia.  The  deep  red  color  due  to  urates  is  not  uncommonly 
thought  to  indicate  the  presence  of  blood,  but  on  heating  a  small 
quantity  of  urine  in  a  test  tube  the  distinction  is  so  evident  that, 
for  the  sake  of  reassuring  the  patient  or  his  friends,  it  is  worth 
while  dissolving  some  of  the  urates  in  their  presence. 


324  RENAL  DISEASES. 

When  uric  acid  crystals  are  being  passed  they  may  occasionally 
cause  considerable  irritation.  Commonly  these  crystals  are  dis- 
tinctly visible,  and  when  examined  microscopically  they  are  found 
to  form  rosette  masses  of  brilliantly  tinged  crystals,  the  form  of  the 
mass  sufficiently  accounting  for  the  irritation  they  produce.  The 
treatment  must  depend  upon  the  conditions  under  which  they  are 
found.  In  large  cities,  and  among  the  upper  classes,  they  fre- 
quently call  for  a  great  reduction  in  the  amount  of  food  taken, 
more  particularly  with  regard  to  the  nitrogenous  elements  of  the 
food.  Although  an  excess  of  nitrogenous  food  appears  to  favor  the 
deposition  of  uric  acid,  this  may  be  further  increased  by  reckless 
indulgence  in  alcoholic  beverages  and  saccharine  substances,  and  by 
the  life  of  relative  inactivity  usually  led  by  these  patients,  which 
contrasts  painfully  with  the  energy  displayed  by  them  at  meal  times. 
These  remarks  furnish  sufficient  indications  for  modifying  the  habits 
of  these  individuals,  and  not  only  should  they  be  encouraged  to  be 
less  indulgent  in  regard  to  their  diet,  but  they  should  be  stuuulated 
to  lead  more  physiological  lives  and  to  take  an  increased  amount  of 
exercise.  These  measures  may  be  aided  in  their  curative  tendencies 
by  the  use  of  alkalies.  It  is  generally  inadvisable  to  produce  alka- 
linity of  the  urine,  but  there  is  distinct  advantage  in  reducing  the 
acidity.  Lithium  compounds  may  be  used  with  this  object,  and 
they  are  commonly  found  to  be  less  depressant  than  salts  of  potas- 
sium or  of  sodium,  which  possess  a  similar  power  of  reducing  the 
acidity  of  the  urine,  as  well  as  of  rendering  it  distinctly  alkaline. 
Lithium  citrate  may  be  given  in  doses  of  5  grains  and  upward, 
when  administered  in  a  mixture  with  other  alkalies  or  with  bitter 
tonics  ;  or  in  place  of  these,  from  60  to  120  grains  of  the  efferves- 
cent lithium  citrate  may  be  given  alone.  It  must  be  remembered, 
however,  that  in  this  preparation  a  considerable  proportion  of  sodium 
bicarbonate  is  present.  Litliium  carbonate  is  also  frequently  used 
in  doses  of  from  2  to  5  grains,  but,  like  the  citrate,  this  is  mostly 
employed  in  conjunction  with  other  alkalies. 

With  the  twofold  object  of  favoring  alkalinity  and  increasing 
dilution  of  the  urine,  lithia  water  is  often  prescribed  ;  this  may  be 
taken  with  the  meals  or  at  bedtime  with  a  small  quantity  of  alcohol. 
Uric  acid  crystals  are  most  frequently  seen  when  the  urine  has 
attained  its  maximum  of  concentration  and  of  acidity ;  these  con- 
ditions are  to  be  met  with  in  the  urine  that  is  passed  in  the  early 
morning  ;  hence  the   special   value  of  employing     lithia  water  at 


LITHUBIA.  325 

night.  When  the  deposition  of  uric  acid  is  associated  with  gastrice 
irritation  there  is  some  advantage  in  using  sodium  bicarbonate  and 
sodium  chloride  in  fairly  large  doses  :  20  grains  of  the  former  and 
5  grains  of  the  latter  may  be  given  at  bedtime,  or  a  mixture  of  20 
grains  of  sodium  bicarbonate  with  10  grains  of  potassium  carbonate, 
given  under  the  same  conditions,  may  sometimes  be  more  beneficial. 
It  is  of  some  importance  to  use  these  alkalies  in  a  single  dose  at 
night-time,  since  they  thus  favor  the  alkalinity  of  the  morning  urine, 
and  they  are  also  less  liable  then  to  impede  gastric  digestion  ;  they 
may  be  conveniently  given  in  milk,  which  to  some  extent  conceals 
their  unpleasant  taste  and  has  the  additional  advantage  of  favoring 
diuresis.  Occasionally  it  is  found  that  the  tendency  to  the  deposi- 
tion of  uric  acid  is  aided  by  habits  which  might  often  be  regarded 
as  abstemious ;  thus,  when  meals  are  taken  at  very  long  intervals, 
the  urine  becomes  periodically  extremely  acid  and  concentrated,  and 
under  these  conditions  uric  acid  may  appear  in  crystals,  even  though 
the  total  amount  of  food  taken  m'ay  not  exceed  the  physiological 
requirements.  When  the  condition  appears  to  be  due  to  this  error, 
the  meals  should  be  taken  at  intervals  of  about  three  hours,  and 
should  be  of  a  light  nature.  Even  during  the  intervals  between 
breakfast  and  the  midday  meal,  a  cup  of  milk  with  soda  water  or 
Vichy  should  be  taken,  and  the  same  may  be  repeated  shortly 
before  going  to  bed. 

Many  of  the  alkaline  mineral  springs  have  been  recommended  in 
the  treatment  of  uric  acid  gravel.  Some  are  credited  with  the  power 
of  dissolving  the  crystals,  but  this  may  be  an  error  of  observation. 
Symptoms  of  uric  acid  gravel  may  be  diminished  during  the  use  of 
alkaline  mineral  waters,  such  as  those  of  Mt.  Hartford,  Poland, 
Bethesda,  Vichy,  Royat,  Neuenahr,  etc. ;  but  in  all  probability  the 
improved  condition  results  from  the  concretions  which  are  present 
in  the  urinary  passages,  being  washed  away  by  the  increased  flow 
of  fluid,  while  the  tendency  to  the  further  formation  of  concretions 
is  reduced,  owing  to  the  diminution  of  the  acidity  and  to  the  dilu- 
tion of  the  urine. 

Patients  subject  to  uric  acid  gravel  should  be  advised  to  employ 
laxatives  to  favor  the  daily  action  of  the  bowels.  Cascara  sagrada 
may  sometimes  be  of  great  service,  and  its  action  may  be  consider- 
ably increased  by  the  addition  of  a  small  quantity  of  calomel.  Some 
patients  prefer  to  employ  podophyllin,  or  aloin ;  but,  inasmuch  as 
this  condition  is  frequently  associated  with  constipation  and  with  a 


326  RENAL  DISEASES. 

tendency  to  hemorrhoids,  these  remedies  may  sometimes  be  objec- 
tionable. Other  measures  which  will  diminish  the  tendency  to 
uric  acid  gravel  are  those  calculated  to  improve  the  general  health. 
Mild  exercise  in  the  open  air  is  often  very  useful,  but  the  exercise 
should  stop  short  of  fatigue,  and  should  never  be  sufficiently  violent 
to  cause  free  perspiration,  which,  in  its  turn,  might  lead  to  concen- 
tration of  the  urine  and  thus  favor  deposition  of  uric  acid.  It  is  advisa- 
ble also  to  recommend  the  daily  employment  of  a  cold  bath,  provided 
always  that  the  use  of  the  cold  bath  is  followed  by  a  good  reaction ; 
this  may  frequently  be  favored  by  the  use  of  a  rough  bath  towel. 

Phosphaturia.  The  deposition  of  phosphates  occurs  in  alkaline 
urine,  and  it  may  follow  the  ordinary  alkaline  tide  which  so  often 
ensues  after  meals,  or  it  may  be  associated  with  more  permanent 
alkalinity  due  to  inflammatory  processes  connected  with  the  urinary 
passages.  The  former  condition  results  in  the  passage  of  white, 
milky,  or  chalky  looking  urine  at  intervals  during  the  day.  This 
chalky  opacity  may  appear  only  toward  the  end  of  micturition,  and 
it  frequently  causes  much  anxiety  and  dread  of  the  formation  of 
phosphatic  calculi.  The  precipitation  of  phosphates  in  the  amor- 
phous form,  however,  is  very  rarely  followed  by  the  formation  of 
urinary  calculi ;  it  appears  to  result  merely  from  disorders  of  diges- 
tion, which  are  often  due  to  the  consumption  of  large  quantities  of 
vegetable  food.  Sometimes,  also,  it  follows  the  employment  of  spe- 
cial articles  of  food ;  thus,  in  many  individuals,  phosphaturia  will 
ensue  after  the  use  of  fish,  particularly  of  boiled  fish  of  coarse  fibre. 
This  condition  may  also  result  from  sedentary  habits  connected  with 
much  mental  exertion,  and  it  is  often  accompanied  by  oxaluria  and 
by  a  general  feeling  of  mental  depression. 

This  form  of  phosphaturia  is,  however,  of  comparatively  little 
importance,  and  it  will  frequently  disappear  entirely  with  the 
administration  of  acids,  especially  if  they  are  given  with  tonic 
remedies  to  increase  the  digestive  powers.  Small  quantities  of 
nux  vomica  and  of  diluted  hydrochloric  acid  are  often  of  great 
service,  and  the  action  of  these  remedies  is  largely  increased  by 
suitable  modification  of  the  diet  and  of  the  general  habits  of  the 
individual.  Phosphaturia  is  extremely  frequent  among  students 
who,  in  the  anxieties  connected  with  examinations,  are  perhaps 
leading  unphysiological  lives.  The  condition,  which  is  in  reality 
of  slight  importance,  is  often  the  cause  of  a  disproportionate  amount 
of  anxiety,  since  it  may  be  mistaken  for  spermatorrhoea. 


PHOSPHATUBIA.  327 

The  form  of  phosphaturia  connected  with  permanent  alkalinity 
of  the  urine  is  almost  invariably  due  to  chronic  irritation  of  the 
bladder,  though  sometimes  it  may  ensue  with  irritation  of  the  ureter, 
or  of  the  pelvis  of  the  kidney.  Phosphates  may  thus  result  from 
the  introduction  of  bacteria  through  the  employment  of  dirty  cath- 
eters. The  deposition  of  phosphates  frequently  occurs  outside  of 
the  body  during  the  ammoniacal  decomposition  of  urine  that  has 
been  left  to  stand  in  a  warm  place.  The  phosphaturia  due  to  per- 
manent alkalinity  tends  to  form  the  well-known  knife-rest  crystals 
of  triple  phosphates  ;  and  when  these  are  produced  within  the  body, 
there  is  considerable  risk  of  the  formation  of  calculi,  if  the  crystals 
are  deposited  on  any  blood  clot  or  other  nucleus.  Phosphaturia  is 
also  likely  to  arise  when  the  bladder  is  not  being  completely  emp- 
tied ;  thus,  independently  of  the  employment  of  catheters,  phospha- 
turia and  ammoniacal  urine  may  ensue  after  enlargement  of  the 
prostate  in  elderly  men. 

From  what  has  been  already  said  of  the  etiology  of  this  condi- 
tion, it  is  obvious  that  the  treatment  is,  to  a  large  extent,  necessarily 
surgical.  Chronic  irritation  of  the  bladder  may,  however,  be  re- 
lieved by  the  internal  administration  of  boric  acid,  which  may  be 
given  in  doses  of  from  5  to  15  grains,  and  similar  antiseptic  action 
may  be  exerted  by  the  use  of  salicylates,  salicin,  or  of  salol,  which 
all  give  rise  to  the  presence  of  salicyluric  acid  in  the  urine,  which 
exerts  a  beneficial  control  over  the  further  development  of  bacteria 
within  the  bladder.  Although  these  remedies  are  frequently  of 
service,  it  is  commonly  necessary  to  resort  to  surgical  measures  as 
well ;  thus,  in  cases  of  enlarged  prostate,  a  catheter  must  be  used 
twice  a  day,  so  as  to  insure  the  complete  emptying  of  the  bladder. 
When,  on  the  other  hand,  the  condition  is  connected  with  cystitis, 
although  boric  acid  and  similar  internal  antiseptics  may  be  of  con- 
siderable service,  still  greater  benefit  will  often  follow  the  irrigation 
of  the  bladder  with  boric  acid,  or  with  dilute  solutions  of  silver 
nitrate ;  and,  in  addition,  it  is  desirable  to  encourage  the  employ- 
ment of  copious  draughts  of  unirritating  fluids,  such  as  milk,  barley 
water,  and  the  like,  which  will  favor  the  relief  of  irritation  by  dilu- 
tion of  the  urine.  It  is  unnecessary,  in  this  place,  to  enter  into 
greater  detail  connected  with  the  treatment  of  acute  or  chronic  cys- 
titis, but  it  may  be  remarked  that  the  irritation  and  discomfort  may 
frequently  necessitate  the  employment  of  alkaline  remedies,  although 
these  may  to  some  extent  favor  the  deposition  of  phosphates.     The 


328  RENAL  DISEASES. 

indications  for  these  alkalies  are  to  be  found  in  the  frequency  of 
micturition  and  the  association  of  pain.  When  these  symptoms  are 
not  severe,  boric  acid  or  salicylates  are  preferable ;  but  should  there 
be  great  complaint  of  pain,  it  is  almost  essential  to  use  sodium  bicar- 
bonate, lithium  citrate,  or  other  alkalies,  so  as  to  reduce  the  discom- 
fort ;  and,  under  such  circumstances,  the  deposition  of  phosphates 
must  be  controlled  partly  by  judicious  diet  and  partly  by  the  in- 
creased quantity  of  liquid  consumed. 

Sometimes,  with  the  view  of  further  increasing  the  amount  of 
excretion,  infusion  of  buchu  may  be  administered  ;  commonly,  how- 
ever, it  is  well  to  avoid  this  preparation  if  there  is  much  complaint 
of  pain.  Other  remedies  which  are  employed  are  preparations  of 
turpentine,  of  santal,  and  of  juniper,  but  in  cases  of  cystitis  all  of 
these  are  liable  to  cause  more  discomfort,  although  by  producing  an 
increased  excretion  they  cause  reduction  in  the  amount  of  phosphates 
deposited. 

Oxaluria.  The  deposition  of  crystals  of  oxalate  of  lime  occurs 
under  very  numerous  conditions.  Oxaluria  frequently  coexists  with 
phosphaturia,  but  notwithstanding  this  association  the  condition 
appears  to  result  more  commonly  from  the  employment  of  vegetable 
diet.  In  a  large  number  of  ordinary  articles  of  diet  oxalic  acid  is 
present  in  considerable  quantity  ;  thus,  for  example,  in  rhubarb  and 
in  spinach  the  crystals  may  be  readily  recognized,  and  if  the  pro- 
portion of  oxalic  acid  in  the  system  is  largely  increased  by  a  diet  in 
which  these  articles  are  included,  this  increase  may  favor  the  depo- 
sition of  small  brilliant  octahedral  crystals  of  oxalate  of  lime ;  more 
rarely  the  crystals  may  be  of  the  dumb-bell  form.  Oxalate  of  lime, 
or  oxalic  acid,  occurs  in  tomatoes,  cabbage,  celery,  and  beetroot, 
while  it  is  also  an  ingredient  of  most  of  the  commoner  forms  of 
fruit.  To  a  variable  extent  it  is  present,  too,  in  tea  and  in  cocoa. 
The  tendency  to  the  deposition  of  crystals  is  favored  by  a  high  de- 
gree of  acidity  of  the  urine,  the  octahedra  most  commonly  occurring 
with  conditions  which  favor  increased  acidity.  Sometimes  these 
crystals  appear  to  be  deposited  after  the  water  has  been  allowed  to 
stand,  but  they  may  often  be  formed  within  the  body,  and  may  thus 
greatly  increase  the  risks  of  the  formation  of  calculi  in  the  urinary 
passages. 

The  deposition  of  oxalic  acid  is  commonly  associated  with  some 
dyspeptic  symptoms  and  with  mental  depression.  Frequently  it 
will  be  found  that  oxaluria  occurs  when  individuals  are  overworked 


OXAL  URIA.  329 

or  when  they  are  of  a  neurotic  temperament.  Considerable  mental 
depression  is  often  regarded  as  an  indication  of  oxaluria,  especially 
when  this  is  associated  with  a  sense  of  discomfort  in  the  lumbar 
region  and  undue  irritability  of  the  bladder.  It  may  be  questioned, 
however,  whether  these  symptoms  are  directly  referable  to  oxaluria, 
unless,  indeed,  the  vesical  irritation  is  to  be  regarded  in  this  light. 
Mental  depression  and  dyspepsia  are  sufficiently  frequent  among 
nervous,  overworked  individuals,  and  even  independently  of  oxal- 
uria  they  lead  to  muscular  weakness  and  lassitude.  In  all  prob- 
ability, therefore,  it  would  appear  that  the  oxaluria  is  merely  oue  of 
the  side  phenomena,  without  being  responsible  for  the  production 
of  the  principal  symptoms. 

From  what  has  been  said  of  the  influence  of  diet,  it  is  desirable 
to  modify  the  diet  of  patients  known  to  be  troubled  with  oxaluria, 
to  reduce  the  amount  of  vegetable  ingredients,  and  to  avoid  par- 
ticularly those  articles  which  are  rich  in  oxalic  acid  or  in  oxalates. 
It  is  also  advisable  to  reduce  the  strength  and  the  quantity  of  tea, 
and  to  furnish  the  requisite  amount  of  liquid  in  a  form  not  likely 
to  promote  oxaluria.  Milk  and  bland  mucilaginous  draughts,  such 
as  barley  water,  may  be  used  freely.  Should  the  diet  lead  to  con- 
stipation, this  tendency  should  be  counteracted  by  the  use  of  salines 
or  of  mild  cathartics.  Small  doses  of  aloin,  of  cascara  sagrada,  of 
euonymin,  or  even  of  podophyllin,  may  be  employed  occasionally, 
with  the  view  of  relieving  constipation ;  but  more  important  even 
than  any  of  these  remedies  is  the  regulation  of  the  general  habits  of 
the  individual.  Oxaluria  so  often  follows  overwork  with  sedentary 
habits  that  it  is  necessary  to  encourage  exercise  in  the  open  air,  and, 
if  possible,  to  reduce  the  amount  of  nerve  strain.  The  general 
physical  condition  may  also  be  improved  by  favoring  the  action  of 
the  skin  with  cold  baths  and  with  the  free  use  of  a  rough  towel. 

When  the  depression  is  extreme  it  is  necessary  to  give  ordinary 
tonic  remedies,  and  when  associated  with  sleeplessness  it  will  call 
for  the  employment  of  sedatives.  Ordinarily  it  is  advisable  to  con- 
fine the  employment  of  sedatives  or  narcotics  to  the  ordinary  hours 
of  sleep,  and  to  administer  nerve  tonics  during  the  waking  hours. 
Full  doses  of  ammonium  bromide,  or  of  potassium  bromide,  at  bed- 
time may  be  beneficial ;  while  even  moderate  doses,  employed  during 
the  day,  may  further  increase  depression  and  languor — symptoms 
which  are  very  readily  controlled  by  the  administration  of  nux 
vomica  and  of  preparations  of  iron.     Arsenic  is  also  frequently 


330  RENAL  DISEASES. 

beneficial  in  these  cases,  but  it  must  be  used  with  discretion.  If 
given  in  large  doses  it  may  disturb  the  digestion,  while  smaller  doses 
will  increase  the  digestive  powers,  appetite,  and  blood  formation. 

Oxalic  acid  is  so  commonly  present  in  association  with  uric  acid 
in  acid  urine  that  alkalies  have  sometimes  been  given.  Their  action 
should  be  carefully  watched,  since  they  may  favor  further  dys- 
pepsia, and  they  usually  increase  the  lowness  of  spirits.  They  appear 
to  be  most  serviceable  in  those  cases  associated  with  the  deposition 
of  uric  acid,  while  they  scarcely  influence  the  frequency  of  the  appear- 
ance of  oxaluric  crystals  when  they  occur  as  the  result  of  dyspeptic 
troubles  or  of  errors  of  diet. 

Haematuria.  The  importance  of  hsematuria  depends  upon  the 
cause  of  this  symptom,  since  hsematuria  must  distinctly  be  regarded 
as  a  symptom,  though  it  is  often  the  first  indication  of  a  diseased 
condition  that  attracts  attention.  Hsematuria  is  sometimes  associ- 
ated with  serious  organic  diseases,  but  it  is  also  frequently  connected 
with  comparatively  trifling  ailments  of  a  passing  nature.  Before 
considering  the  treatment  of  this  symptom,  it  is  essential,  therefore, 
to  formulate  the  principal  conditions  under  which  it  arises.  Some 
of  these  conditions  require  no  treatment,  others  involve  the  adoption 
of  surgical  measures,  others  necessitate  active  medication  ;  moreover, 
it  must  be  remembered  that  after  the  disappearance  of  hsematuria 
the  patient  is  not  always  to  be  regarded  as  cured. 

Haematuria  may  result  from  local  lesions,  such  as  the  over-disten- 
tion  or  rupture  of  bloodvessels  within  the  kidney,  the  pelvis  of  the 
kidney,  the  ureter,  the  bladder,  the  prostate,  or  the  urethra.  When 
the  blood  comes  from  the  substance  of  the  l^idney,  hsematuria  is  gen- 
erally an  indication  of  acute  Bright's  disease,  or  of  active  congestion 
occurring  in  the  course  of  chronic  Bright's  disease.  It  may  also  be 
an  indication  of  laceration  or  bruising  of  kidneys,  as  in  injuries 
occurring  in  the  foot-ball  field,  or  in  railway,  street,  or  hunting  acci- 
dents. In  all  the  above-mentioned  examples  of  hsematuria  the  blood 
is  intimately  mixed  with  the  urine,  and  blood  casts  will  be  found, 
indicating  that  the  effusion  has  come  from  vessels  within  the  sub- 
stance of  the  kidney. 

Severe  hemorrhage  may  sometimes  occur  as  the  result  of  displace- 
ment of  the  kidney,  but  a  more  common  cause  is  to  be  found  in  the 
presence  of  renal  calculi  in  the  pelvis  or  in  the  ureter.  This  differs 
from  most  of  the  preceding  causes  of  hsematuria  in  being  associated 
with  much  more  violent  pain.     The  pain  of  acute  or  subacute  at- 


HEMATURIA.  331 

tacks  of  nephritis  is  generally  little  more  than  a  dull  sense  of  aching 
ill  the  lumbar  region  ;  while  witli  traumatic  causes,  although  the  pain 
at  the  time  of  the  injury  may  be  very  severe,  the  acute  character  is 
soon  lost  if  the  patient  is  kept  at  rest.  With  renal  calculus,  how- 
ever, as  the  cause  of  hsematuria,  the  pain  is  extremely  acute,  and 
constitutes  renal  colic,  of  which  mention  must  be  made  later. 

The  symptoms  of  some  forms  of  chronic  diseases  of  the  kidney 
are  occasionally  interrupted  by  the  appearance  of  hsematuria ;  thus 
it  is  met  with  in  cancer,  in  syphilis,  and  in  tubercle.  In  the  last 
mentioned — a  condition  which  is  fairly  frequent  in  children — the 
hsematuria  may  be  superadded  by  pyuria.  With  cancer  of  the  kid- 
ney, hematuria,  should  it  occur,  may  be  very  profuse.  This  symp- 
tom is,  however,  of  quite  secondary  importance  from  a  diagnostic 
point  of  view,  owing  to  the  rapid  growth  of  cancer  of  the  kidney. 
With  syphilis  the  symptom  is  not  very  frequent,  but  it  occurs  occa- 
sionally, and  the  connection  with  this  disease  is  indicated  by  the 
improvement  sometimes  seen  with  antisyphilitic  remedies.  Hemor- 
rhage from  the  pelvis  of  the  kidney  is  sometimes  dependent  upon 
the  presence  of  a  parasite — the  Bilharzia  hsematobia.  This  consti- 
tutes the  endemic  hsematuria  seen  in  Egypt  and  in  some  other  hot 
countries,  and  the  diagnosis  is  readily  made  by  the  detection  of  ova 
and  embryos  in  the  urine.  Slight  hsematuria  may  frequently  occur 
with  injuries  of  the  skin,  such  as  burns,  or  with  long  exposure  to 
cold,  while  it  is  occasionally  seen  with  scarlet  fever,  tonsillitis,  diph- 
theria, typhoid  fever,  etc. ;  in  these  conditions  the  diagnosis  between 
simple  congestion  and  definite  acute  Bright's  disease  is  frequently 
very  difficult. 

The  occurrence  of  hasmaturia  from  congestion  due  to  the  employ- 
ment of  renal  irritants,  such  as  cantharides  or  turpentine,  is  a  suffi- 
ciently well-recognized  condition,  of  which  little  need  be  said.  It 
is  also  scarcely  necessary  to  enter  into  detail  concerning  the  frequent 
appearance  of  blood  in  the  urine  as  the  result  of  conditions  prima- 
rily connected  with  the  bladder.  The  presence  of  calculi  within  the 
bladder  will  occasion  hsematuria,  with  pain  in  the  hypogastrium  and 
excessive  frequency  of  micturition.  Hemorrhage  will  also  result 
from  growths  within  the  bladder,  such  as  villous  papillomata,  or 
other  forms  of  malignant  disease,  and  it  is  sometimes  seen  in  con- 
nection with  tubercular  ulceration  within  the  bladder.  It  should 
not  be  forgotten  that  even  small  traumatic  abrasions  may  sometimes 
be  associated  with  severe  hsematuria.     Laceration  of  the  urethra,  as 


332  RENAL  DISEASES. 

the  result  of  injury,  may  give  rise  to  this  symptom,  but  any  hesita- 
tion about  the  origin  will  rarely  be  felt,  since  the  separate  passage 
of  blood,  either  before  micturition  or  during  the  strain  at  the  end  of 
micturition,  is  of  considerable  diagnostic  importance. 

There  are  some  diseases^  such  as  scurvy  and  purpura  hemorrhagica, 
in  which  heematuria  is  frequently  seen,  and  constitutes  a  somewhat 
serious  complication.  In  these  cases,  as  also  in  malarial  fevers,  in 
cholera,  and  in  yellow  fever,  the  hsematuria  can  scarcely  be  treated 
as  a  separate  symptom.  Hsematuria  may  also  occur  in  some  rare 
cases  of  haBmophilia.  The  condition  has  also  been  stated  to  be  some- 
times vicarious  of  menstruation,  of  hemorrhoids,  or  even  of  asthma. 

The  treatment  of  this  symptom  must,  as  already  stated,  depend 
upon  the  cause.  In  all  cases  it  is  desirable  to  insist  upon  absolute 
rest  in  a  warm  bed  during  the  urgency  of  the  symptom,  and  in  some 
of  the  conditions  above  enumerated  this  will  produce  a  very  marked 
diminution  in  the  hsematnria.  Should  the  action  of  any  irritant  be 
suspected,  the  course  of  treatment  is  comparatively  simple.  The  use 
of  the  irritant  must  be  discontinued  and  other  measures  substituted„ 
The  removal  of  the  cause  and  the  adoption  of  a  liquid  form  of  diet, 
with  the  further  use  of  alkaline  diluent  drinks  to  reduce  the  acidity 
of  the  urine,  will,  under  such  circumstances,  often  suffice  to  cure  the 
patient. 

With  regard  to  hsematuria  with  the  acute  or  subacute  forms  of 
Bright's  disease,  directions  for  the  treatment  of  this  symptom  would 
almost  entail  a  description  of  the  whole  treatment  of  the  underlying 
disease.  During  the  whole  of  the  early  treatment  of  these  condi- 
tions the  patient  must  be  kept  in  bed,  and  all  solid  foods  must  be 
withheld.  In  these  diseases  the  amount  of  blood  that  is  lost  is  of 
comparatively  little  moment,  the  hemorrhage,  although  weakening, 
never  being  sufficient  to  cause  anxiety.  Hence,  if  for  no  other 
reason,  it  is  not  advisable  to  employ  many  of  the  astringents  which 
have  frequently  been  recommended.  Tannic  acid,  gallic  acid,  and 
perchloride  of  iron  have  often  been  advocated,  but  generally,  in  acute 
and  subacute  attacks  of  nephritis,  they  tend  to  impair  digestion, 
while  they  exert  very  little,  if  any,  control  over  the  size  of  the 
vessels  in  the  kidney.  On  the  other  hand,  measures  that  are  ordina- 
rily employed  for  the  relief  of  dropsy — such  as  vapor  baths,  diapho- 
retics, and  hydragogue  purgatives  for  diverting  the  blood  from  the 
kidney — will  usually  be  found  to  produce  marked  diminution  of 
hsematuria. 


HJEMO  GL  OB  IN  URIA.  333 

It  is  not  necessary  here  to  enter  into  detail  concerning  the  treat- 
ment of  the  surgical  forms  of  hsemataria.  Patients  with  laceration 
must  be  kept  at  rest,  and  narcotics  should  be  employed  to  relieve 
pain  and  to  insure  quiet.  When  hsematuria  occurs  in  connection 
Avith  renal  calculus  it  is  frequently  associated  with  such  severe  pain 
as  to  involve  the  use  of  opiates  and  of  morphine ;  but  the  treatment 
must  necessarily  be  regulated  by  the  general  course  of  the  disease, 
rather  than  with  a  view  to  check  this  special  symptom.  The  same 
rule  applies  to  most  of  the  other  causes  of  hsematuria  which  have 
been  enumerated.  The  primary  disease  will  require  treatment,  rather 
than  the  haematuria,  although  this  symptom  is  very  alarming  in  its 
appearance. 

In  chronic  cases  of  hsematuria,  some  advantage  may  be  occasion- 
ally obtained  from  the  employment  of  the  preparations  of  ergot, 
which  may  be  given  either  by  the  mouth  or  hypodermatically.  In 
conditions  where  the  hsematuria  persists  for  a  long  time  in  spite  of 
rest  and  liquid  diet,  small  doses  of  alum  will  sometimes  prove  ser- 
viceable— from  3  to  5  grains,  given  three  or  four  times  a  day  in 
solution,  appear  to  be  able  to  control  the  loss  of  blood. 

The  treatment  of  many  of  the  forms  of  hsematuria  above  men- 
tioned will  be  further  considered  under  the  respective  headings  of 
the  different  medical  diseases  in  which  this  symptom  occurs. 

Hsemogclobinuria  occurs  in  two  forms :  the  paroxysmal  or  peri- 
odic, and  the  form  which  is  more  commonly  connected  with  toxic 
influences,  as,  for  example,  with  the  inhalation  of  arseniuretted 
hydrogen  and  with  poisoning  by  various  acids,  by  iodine,  or  by 
potassium  chlorate. 

The  paroxysmal  hsemoglobinuria  is  usually  associated  with  shiver- 
ing fits  resembling  ague,  and  the  blood-coloring  matter  appears  in 
the  urine  after  the  paroxysms.  The  treatment  of  paroxysmal 
hsemoglobinuria  is  not  particularly  satisfactory.  Cases  have  recov- 
ered, but  it  is  extremely  doubtful  whether  the  recoveries  are  attrib- 
utable to  the  treatment  that  has  been  adopted.  From  the  nature 
of  the  symptoms,  it  is  advisable  to  keep  patients  with  hsemoglobin- 
uria in  bed  in  a  warm  room,  since  under  these  conditions  the  feeling 
of  chilliness  or  the  actual  shivering  fits  are  less  likely  to  occur.  It 
may  be  of  service,  however,  to  enumerate  the  several  measures  that 
have  been  suggested  for  the  treatment  of  this  condition. 

Various  forms  of  iodine  have  been  used,  and  gallic  acid  has  been 
favorably  mentioned ;  while — apparently  under  the  idea  that  par- 


334  RENAL  DISEASES. 

oxysmal  hsemoglobinuria  is  in  some  obscure  way  connected  with  renal 
congestion — bleeding,  dry  cupping  over  the  loins,  and  even  vapor 
baths  have  been  recommended.  In  some  cases  of  hsemoglobinuria 
a  definite  history  of  exposure  to  malaria,  or  of  syphilitic  infection, 
may  be  obtained,  and  under  such  conditions  it  would  undoubtedly 
be  wise  to  employ  quinine  or  preparations  of  cinchona,  or  else  to 
use  mercurials  and  potassium  iodide.  Frequently,  however,  such 
helpful  indications  are  wanting,  and  the  utmost  that  can  be  done  is 
to  use  tonic  remedies,  such  as  arsenic  and  preparations  of  iron,  to 
advocate  the  employment  of  warm  clothing,  and,  if  possible,  to 
recommend  residence  in  a  warm  climate  during  the  winter  months. 
These  measures  appear  to  have  a  far  more  beneficial  effect  on  cases 
of  paroxysmal  hsemoglobinuria  than  any  influence  exerted  by  drugs, 
unless  exception  be  made  for  the  malarial  and  syphilitic  cases. 

With  the  simpler  forms  of  hsemogiobinuria  resulting  from  toxic 
influences  or  associated  with  one  of  the  exanthemata,  the  removal 
of  the  cause  is  generally  sufficient  to  check  this  symptom ;  but  in 
these  cases,  also,  hsemogiobinuria  appears  sometimes  to  originate  in 
exposure  to  cold,  although  the  dark  appearance  of  the  water  may 
occur  without  any  distinct  shivering  fits.  Even  this  condition,  how- 
ever, rarely  calls  for  any  special  treatment  beyond  the  recommenda- 
tion to  wear  woollen  clothing,  to  promote  the  action  of  the  skin  by 
the  occasional  use  of  a  warm  bath,  and  to  advise  the  patient  to  keep 
absolutely  at  rest  whenever  troubled  by  a  feeling  of  lassitude,  which 
so  often  forms  the  premonitory  symptom  of  this  form  of  hsemogio- 
binuria. 

Ohyluria.  Two  forms  of  chyluria  have  been  described — the  para- 
sitic and  the  non-parasitic.  The  former  is  the  more  common ;  the 
existence  of  the  latter  depending  upon  several  well-authenticated 
cases  that  have  been  described,  where  the  affection  occurred  in  tem- 
perate regions,  and  where  all  efforts  to  prove  the  presence  of  a  para- 
site were  unsuccessful.  The  parasitic  form,  which  is  widely  dis- 
tributed in  some  tropical  countries,  is  due  to  the  development  of 
the  filaria  sanguinis  hominis.  The  urine  which  is  passed  is  opaque 
and  white,  though  it  may  sometimes  have  some  slight  reddish  tinge, 
owing  to  the  presence  of  blood-coloring  matter.  On  standing,  it 
forms  a  firm,  jelly-like  mass  which  liquefies  later,  when  a  pinkish 
sediment  falls,  and  a  cream-like  material  rises  to  the  surface. 

Chylous  urine  is  often  intermittent  in  its  appearance,  the  attacks 
being  sometimes  separated  by  long  intervals.     In  some  cases,  while 


ALB  UMIN  UBIA .  335 

the  day  urine  coagulates,  the  night  urine  is  less  milky  and  may  even 
appear  to  be  free  from  any  change.  Ordinarily  it  would  aj)pear  that 
this  disease  lasts  almost  indefinitely,  the  duration  being  dependent 
upon  the  length  of  life  of  the  filaria.  Astringents  have  sometimes 
been  employed,  and  injections  of  chloride  of  iron  have  been  made 
into  the  bladder.  As  a  rule,  however,  the  only  treatment  Avhich  is 
likely  to  be  of  much  service  is  the  tonic  form  intended  to  abate  the 
deterioration  of  the  general  health.  Hitherto  no  remedial  measnres 
seem  to  have  had  any  influence  upon  the  vitality  of  the  filaria.  In 
the  rare  cases  in  which  retention  appears  to  depend  upon  the  coagu- 
lation of  the  urine  within  the  bladder,  this  organ  must  be  relieved 
by  irrigation  of  the  bladder,  which  will  favor  the  liquefaction  and 
break  down  the  coagulum. 

Albuminuria.  Albuminuria,  like  hsematuria,  may  exist  under 
conditions  when  its  presence  indicates  either  a  grave  constitutional 
malady  or  a  comparatively  trifling  ailment.  Albuminuria  is  essen- 
tially a  symptom,  and  therefore  its  treatment  is  largely  dependent 
upon  the  cause.  When  forming  part  of  a  grave  affection,  the  mere 
symptom  of  albuminuria  may  to  a  great  extent  be  disregarded  so  far 
as  treatment  is  concerned — that  is  to  say,  in  many  forms  of  chronic 
Bright's  disease  the  albumin  affords  an  indication  of  the  nature  of 
the  disease,  although  the  amount  lost  is  often  so  small  that  it  does 
not  materially  weaken  the  patient,  and  does  not,  therefore,  call  for 
special  treatment.  The  amount  of  albumin  in  such  cases  may  often 
be  a  guide  as  to  the  progress  of  the  disease,  and  may,  therefore, 
indicate  the  employment  of  a  special  course  of  diet  and  hygienic 
control,  as  well  as  of  remedies  calculated  to  treat  the  disease  rather 
than  to  produce  any  material  modification  in  the  amount  of  albumin 
that  is  being,  lost.  Albuminuria,  therefore,  in  many  forms  of  chronic 
kidney  disease,  must  be  appropriately  dealt  with  in  connection  with 
the  disease  under  which  it  occurs,  rather  than  as  a  separate  affection. 
On  the  other  hand,  in  a  large  proportion  of  cases  of  albuminuria  this 
symptom  stands  almost  alone,  and  indeed  the  presence  of  albumin  in 
the  water  may  cause  so  little  disturbance  that  it  is  only  discovered 
by  some  chance  examination.  This  group  includes  the  forms  of 
albuminuria  that  have  been  termed  functional,  intermittent,  and 
cyclic,  together  with  the  so-called  albuminuria  of  adolescence.  It 
is  this  group  which  more  particularly  demands  recognition  in  this 
place. 

The  first  of  the  two  forms  of  albuminuria  above  mentioned  con- 


336  BENAL  DISEASES. 

stitiites  what  may  be  termed  true  renal  albuminuria,  inasmuch  as 
albumin  is  added  to  the  water  from  the  renal  vessels,  and  is,  there- 
fore, intimately  mixed  with  the  water  and  commonly  associated  with 
the  presence  of  casts  of  various  kinds.  Another  form  of  albumin- 
uria, however,  deserves  mention,  namely,  the  extra-renal,  or  acci- 
dental albuminuria,  in  which  from  some  accidental  cause  the  albumin 
is  added  to  the  urine  after  it  has  left  the  kidney.  This  accidental 
cause  is  sometimes  to  be  found  in  the  addition  of  blood  or  of  pus ; 
thus  the  presence  of  a  calculus  in  any  part  of  the  urinary  tract  will 
probably  give  rise  to  occasional  hsematuria,  and  consequently  albu- 
minuria, and  all  the  conditions  which  have  already  been  mentioned 
as  producing  hsematuria  will  necessarily  also  produce  albuminuria. 
In  addition  to  this,  however,  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  admix- 
ture of  pus  will  give  indications  of  albumin,  and  pus  may  be  derived 
from  the  substance  of  the  kidney,  or  from  the  pelvis  of  the  kidney ; 
more  rarely  from  the  ureter,  and  most  commonly  from  the  bladder 
or  urethra.  It  is  easy  to  recognize  the  presence  of  pus  in  the  urine, 
but  it  is  not  always  easy  to  indicate  the  source,  nor  to  determine 
whether  the  amount  of  albumin  that  is  present  exceeds  that  which 
can  be  accounted  for  by  the  amount  of  pus.  This  difficulty  is  greatest 
when  the  pus  does  not  appear  to  be  formed  within  the  bladder.  In 
some  cases  of  cystitis  the  improvement  during  treatment,  so  far  as 
pus  is  concerned,  will  often  be  far  greater  than  the  alteration  in  the 
amount  of  albumin  present. 

It  is  scarcely  necessary  here  to  enter  into  the  diagnostic  indications 
which  separate  the  simple  cases  of  cystitis,  of  pyelitis,  or  of  hydro- 
nephrosis from  the  same  diseases  to  which  chronic  renal  affections 
are  superadded.  Some  of  these  forms  will  demand  consideration  in 
a  later  section,  but  in  this  place  it  will'be  sufficient  to  confine  atten- 
tion to  the  renal  forms  of  albuminuria  which  are  not  associated  with 
anatomical  lesions  in  the  kidney.  The  chief  difficulty  with  regard 
to  this  group  lies  in  the  diagnosis,  since  it  must  be  remembered  that 
even  in  chronic  nephritis  the  amount  of  albumin  varies  from  day  to 
day,  and  varies  also  with  what  may  be  regarded  as  accidental  con- 
ditions, such  as  those  connected  with  diet,  with  mental  emotion,  or 
with  exposure  to  cold.  To  differentiate  organic  albuminuria  demands 
careful  consideration  of  the  history  of  the  case,  of  the  character  of  the 
pulse,  of  the  nature  of  the  sounds  of  the  heart,  of  the  position  of  the 
apex  beat,  and  of  the  age  of  the  individual ;  but  even  with  every  care 
some  uncertainty  as  to  the  diagnosis  may  persist  until  the  patient 


ALBUMINURIA.  337 

has  been  carefully  watched^  perhaps  for  some  length  of  time.  The 
foremost  consideration,  therefore,  in  connection  with  the  treatment 
of  albuminuria  lies  in  the  formation  of  an  accurate  diagnosis.  The 
probabilities  of  a  transient  form  of  albuminuria  are  greater  when 
dealing  with  youths  or  young  men  than  when  confronted  with  a 
patient  of  middle  age  or  of  advanced  life. 

Even  when  the  existence  of  renal  changes  has  been  provisionally 
negatived,  it  will  be  necessary  to  determine  to  which  of  the  catego- 
ries of  functional  albuminuria  the  individual  case  is  to  be  relegated. 
Careful  inquiry  into  the  habits  of  the  individual  may  throw  a  strong 
probability  upon  some  special  error  occasioning  this  symptom  ;  thus, 
for  example,  it  is  generally  easy  to  ascertain  whether  the  albuminuria 
depends  upon  dietetic  errors,  since,  by  modification  of  the  diet  and 
the  successive  elimination  of  different  articles  which  appear  to  be 
taken  to  excess,  the  amount  of  albumin  may  be  diminished,  or  the 
existence  of  albuminuria  may  even  be  arrested.  Again,  though 
undoubtedly  violent  muscular  exercise  is  occasionally  a  cause  of 
this  symptom,  yet  in  weakly  individuals  it  may  arise  from  any 
mechanical  causes  which  influence  the  blood  pressure  within  the 
kidney ;  thus,  for  example,  in  some  cases  of  albuminuria  of  adoles- 
cence the  mere  change  of  posture  appears  to  produce  this  symptom. 
A  form  of  neurotic  albuminuria  has  been  described,  but  this  group 
rests  upon  a  somewhat  uncertain  basis,  and  in  all  probability  many 
cases  of  so-called  neurotic  albuminuria  must  be  relegated  to  other 
classes.  It  is  perhaps  unnecessary  to  do  more  than  mention  the 
febrile  albuminuria  so  often  associated  with  high  temperatures  ; 
this  form  of  febrile  albuminuria  appears  to  be  dependent  upon  the 
presence  of  toxins,  rather  than  upon  the  actual  temperature  of  the 
body. 

The  so-called  albuminuria  of  adolescence  is  generally  seen  in 
youths  with  pale  faces  and  other  indications  of  depressed  vitality. 
It  is  frequently  associated  with  listlessness  and  languor,  and  even 
though  many  hours  may  be  spent  in  sleep,  the  patient  wakes  unre- 
freshed.  Often  some  disorder  of  digestion  is  to  be  noted.  In  this 
form  the  albumin  varies  in  amount  not  only  from  day  to  day,  but 
even  at  different  times  during  the  day.  Generally  only  a  small 
cloud  is  developed  by  the  contact  test,  while  the  urine  maintains  a 
good  color  and  fairly  high  specific  gravity.  It  has  been  noted  with 
this  form  of  albuminuria  that  the  symptom  frequently  disappears 
entirely  while  patients  are  kept  in  bed,  and  it  has  even  been  asserted 

22 


338  RENAL  DISEASES. 

that  while  in  the  recumbent  posture  many  articles  of  diet  which 
produce  albuminuria  so  soon  as  the  patient  gets  up  maybe  indulged 
in  without  harm. 

In  the  treatment  of  these  functional  forms  of  albuminuria,  next  in 
importance  to  the  removal  of  the  cause,  if  this  can  be  ascertained, 
lies  the  improvement  in  the  general  health,  which  is  to  be  effected 
by  hygienic  measures  and  by  constitutional  remedies.  In  dealing 
with  the  albuminuria  of  adolescence,  much  may  be  done  by  encour- 
aging moderate  athleticism  to  promote  the  functions  of  the  skin ; 
and  this  should  be  insisted  upon,  even  though  the  albuminuria  may 
appear  to  have  originated  in  over-indulgence  in  athletics.  It  is, 
generally  speaking,  a  mistake  to  pass  abruptly  from  one  extreme  to 
another.  The  majority  do  better  with  moderate  exercise,  with  the 
frequent  use  of  a  cold  bath,  and  the  occasional  employment  of  a  hot 
bath ;  the  latter  cleanses  the  surface  and  encourages  the  freedom  of 
action  of  the  skin,  while  the  former  will  undoubtedly  be  found  bene- 
ficial, provided  it  is  followed  by  brisk  reaction.  I  am  convinced 
that  it  is  a  mistake  to  forbid  the  use  of  the  cold  bath  in  all  cases  of 
functional  albuminuria.  This  is  often  done  under  the  impression 
that  the  application  of  cold  will,  by  driving  blood  from  the  surface, 
cause  increased  engorgement  of  internal  organs ;  and  while  this  is 
undoubtedly  true  for  those  who  become  blue  after  the  use  of  a  cold 
bath,  the  majority  improve  and  gain  in  health  and  strength. 

Should  the  albuminuria  be  associated  with  vicious  habits,  these 
must  necessarily  be  corrected ;  but  before  hastily  determining  that 
the  case  is  one  to  be  dealt  with  by  moral  treatment  only,  it  is  advis- 
able to  ascertain  whether  there  is  any  chronic  cause  for  irritation, 
such,  for  example,  as  would  be  produced  by  the  existence  of  worms, 
by  an  elongated  prepuce,  or  even  by  habitual  constipation.  These 
conditions  may  readily  be  recognized,  and  in  any  case  it  is  generally 
advisable  to  encourage  daily  action  of  the  bowel  by  the  use  of  saline 
purgatives.  When  the  albumin  is  associated  with  extreme  nervous- 
ness, ammonium  bromide  may  sometimes  be  employed.  More  com- 
monly, however,  cases  of  functional  albuminuria  do  better  with  nerve 
tonics  than  with  nerve  sedatives ;  thus,  quinine  will  frequently  be 
of  service  in  those  who  are  deficient  in  tone,  and  its  action  may  be 
aided  by  the  employment  of  preparations  of  iron,  provided  that  care 
is  taken  to  prevent  the  occurrence  of  constipation.  IN^ux  vomica 
and  strychnine  are  occasionally  beneficial,  but  these,  together  with 
arsenic,  are  perhaps  better  reserved  for  the  forms  of  functional  albu- 


RENAL  CALCULUS.  339 

minuria  occurring  in  adults  than  for  the  albuminuria  of  adolescence. 
Frequently  in  cases  of  the  latter  class  the  digestive  functions  will 
require  to  be  treated ;  thus,  for  example,  it  may  be  necessary  to  use 
sodium  bicarbonate,  or  preparations  of  bismuth,  together  with  diluted 
hydrocyanic  acid  and  gentian. 

From  the  above  it  will  be  noted  that  with  albuminuria,  as  with 
most  of  the  forms  of  hsematuria,  the  symptom  is  one  which  is  only 
indirectly  attacked.  Various  remedies,  mostly  astringents,  have  been 
recommended  for  their  power  of  controlling  the  amount  of  albumin 
that  is  lost,  but  it  has  already  been  indicated  that  in  these  cases  the 
amount  is  altogether  insignificant ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  digestive 
powers  are  extremely  likely  to  be  disordered  by  any  astringents 
given  in  sufficient  doses  to  produce  a  remote  action  upon  the  vessels 
of  the  kidney.  It  is  necessary,  in  nearly  every  form  of  functional 
albuminuria,  for  the  practitioner  to  satisfy  himself  that  suitable 
clothing  is  worn.  Many  lads,  from  carelessness  or  from  the  desire 
to  harden  themselves,  are  apt  to  wear  an  insufficiency  of  warm 
clothing,  and  although  it  is  extremely  necessary,  in  dealing  with 
this  grouj)  of  complaints,  to  avoid  any  enervating  treatment,  and  to 
encourage  healthy  open-air  exercises  and  interests,  it  is,  nevertheless, 
advisable  in  cases  of  albuminuria  to  insist  upon  the  use  of  warm 
woollen  garments  next  the  skin,  especially  over  the  region  of  the 
loins. 

As  a  rule,  it  is  difficult  to  interfere  with  the  dietary  of  the  ordi- 
nary school-boy,  but  in  the  albuminuria  of  adolescence  it  is  generally 
desirable  to  forbid  the  use  of  eggs,  to  encourage  moderation  in  the 
amount  of  meat,  and  to  recommend  the  liberal  consumption  of  milk. 
Such  modifications  of  dietary  may  often  be  effected  without  exciting 
remark,  though  occasionally  the  use  of  milk  may  present  a  difficulty, 
and  indeed  may  favor  the  occurrence  of  constipation.  As  the  chief 
object,  however,  is  to  act  as  a  diuretic,  water  may  be  taken  in  place 
of  milk ;  a  glass  of  water  on  going  to  bed  and  again  on  rising  will 
often  serve  not  only  as  a  diuretic  but  also  as  a  mild  laxative. 

Renal  Calculus.  The  symptoms  which  may  result  from  the  for- 
mation and  the  descent  of  renal  calculus  depend,  to  a  great  extent, 
upon  the  site  of  the  calculus,  upon  the  degree  of  difficulty  associated 
with  its  passage,  and  upon  the  number  of  calculi  which  may  be 
present.  Renal  calculi  may  vary  very  much  in  size,  from  concre- 
tions that  are  almost  microscopic  to  masses  of  a  quarter  to  half  an 
inch  in   diameter.     The  smaller  concretions  appear  to  form  fre- 


340  RENAL  DISEASES. 

quently  within  the  urinary  tubules.  It  is  no  uncommon  occurrence 
to  find  running  through  the  kidney  small  striations  of  a  yellowish 
color,  consisting  of  small  concretions  of  uric  acid.  These  are  often 
voided  with  the  urine,  and  constitute  the  condition  termed  gravel — 
a  condition  which  has  already  been  referred  to  in  connection  with 
the  uric  acid  diathesis  ;  when,  however,  these  concretions  remain 
within  the  pelvis  of  the  kidney,  they  may  form  nuclei  for  larger 
growths  or  deposits,  which  are  usually  composed  chiefly  of  oxalic 
acid  or  of  oxalate  of  lime,  though  sometimes  the  nucleus  consisting 
of  such  deposits  is  surrounded  with  phosphates,  or  with  urates,  and 
the  size  that  the  renal  calculus  will  then  attain  appears  to  depend 
mainly  upon  the  duration  of  its  retention  in  the  pelvis  of  the  kidney. 
When  located  between  the  pyramids  at  the  lower  part  of  the  kidney, 
the  calculus  may  remain  quiescent,  and  indeed  may  not  give  rise  to 
any  symptoms  other  than  perhaps  occasional  aching  pain  in  the 
lumbar  region. 

On  the  other  hand,  when  the  calculus  is  dislodged  so  as  to  fall 
into  the  pelvis  of  the  kidney  and  to  be  carried  on  with  the  flow  of 
urine  toward  the  ureter,  it  provokes  urgent  symptoms,  the  severity 
of  which  depends,  to  some  extent,  upon  the  shape  and  size  of  the 
calculus.  Of  these  two  elements  the  more  important  is  the  shape. 
The  so-called  mulberry  calculus,  which  is  provided  with  a  number 
of  nodular  projections,  is  invariably  associated  with  very  severe  pain 
during  its  onward  passage,  the  shape  causing  irritation  of  the  lining 
membrane  of  the  ureter,  with  consequent  reflex  spasm  both  above 
and  below  the  position  of  the  calculus.  When  the  calculus  is  smoother 
on  the  surface,  it  will  still  cause  pain,  though  not  of  such  an  acute 
■character,  and  the  condition  more  readily  yields  to  treatment,  the 
shape  of  the  calculus  frequently  favoring  its  progress  along  the  ureter. 

Although  this  act  of  expulsion  forms  the  natural  termination  of 
an  attack  of  renal  colic,  this  termination  is  not  invariably  reached, 
since  it  appears  that  calculi  may  be  dislodged,  may  produce  pain 
and  hsematuria  resembling  the  symptoms  due  to  the  passage  of  a 
renal  calculus,  and  these  symptoms  may  pass  away  if  the  calculus 
returns  to  the  pelvis  of  the  kidney,  instead  of  passing  onward  to  the 
bladder.  One  attack  of  renal  colic  frequently  forms  the  prelude  of 
others,  since  a  renal  calculus  rarely  occurs  alone.  Further,  a  renal 
calculus  may  sometimes  remain  in  the  ureter,  completely  blocking 
the  ureter  and  leading  to  hydronephrosis. 

Another  group  of  symptoms  which  may  occasionally  result  from 


RENAL  CALCULUS.  341 

the  presence  of  a  calculus  in  the  pelvis  of  the  kidney  is  that  of  sup- 
purative pyelitis,  with  the  appearance  of  pus  in  the  urine.  The 
treatment  of  hydronephrosis  and  suppurative  pyelitis  demands  sepa- 
rate consideration  ;  while  those  symptoms  which  are  ordinarily  refer- 
able to  the  presence  of  a  renal  calculus,  and  are  most  amenable  to 
treatment,  ensue  from  the  dislodgement  of  the  calculus  from  its 
nidus,  and  continue  during  its  passage  along  the  ureter.  The  symp- 
toms are  pain  of  a  severe  type,  commonly  associated  with  reflex 
vomiting,  and  frequently  followed  or  accompanied  by  hsematuria. 
The  pain  is  often  so  acute  that  the  patient  may  writhe  in  the 
endeavor  to  find  a  position  of  rest.  It  starts  in  the  lumbar  region 
and  shoots  downward  along  the  course  of  the  ureter,  though  it  is 
often  deflected  along  the  inguinal  canal  and  even  to  the  testicle. 
The  pain  has  been  described  as  acute,  cutting,  or  tearing  in  nature, 
and  it  continues  not  only  during  the  whole  time  that  the  calculus  is 
in  the  ureter,  but  even  after  the  calculus  has  entered  the  bladder ; 
the  degree  of  relief  that  is  afforded  is  only  partial,  the  soreness  along 
the  ureter  remaining  for  a  variable  period. 

The  progress  of  the  calculus  along  the  ureter  appears  to  be  effected 
chiefly  by  the  fluid  pressure  of  the  urine,  since,  although  the  ureter 
contains  muscular  fibre  which  might  conceivably  assist  in  the  pro- 
pulsion of  the  calculus,  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  muscles  are 
in  a  state  of  tonic  spasm  in  front  of  the  calculus  as  well  as  behind, 
and,  indeed,  it  is  found  that  the  measures  which  afford  the  best  pros- 
pects of  relief  are  those  which  favor  relaxation  of  muscular  spasm. 
With  the  onset  of  pain  the  line  of  treatment  to  be  adopted  is  com- 
paratively simple.  Morphine  must  be  injected  subcutaneously,  and 
it  is  well  to  inject  comparatively  small  doses  repeatedly,  at  short 
intervals,  rather  than  to  employ  a  single  larger  dose.  The  com- 
parative frequency  of  the  administration  of  morphine  will  not  only 
serve  to  allay  anxiety  by  indicating  that  measures  for  relief  are 
being  employed,  but  it  will  also  enable  this  relief  to  be  afforded  with 
the  use  of  the  minimum  quantity  of  morphine.  Simultaneously 
with  these  injections  it  is  advisable  to  employ  a  hot  bath  at  the 
highest  temperature  which  the  patient  can  bear,  and  to  encourage 
him  to  remain  in  it  either  until  he  begins  to  feel  faint,  or  until  relief 
is  afforded.  When  possible  a  large  bath  should  be  used  ;  but  even 
if  this  is  not  available,  relief  may  be  obtained  by  using  a  large  hip 
bath  filled  with  hot  water,  while  the  patient  should  be  enveloped 
with  a  blanket  so  that  he  is  surrounded  with  an  atmosphere  of 


342  RENAL  DISEASES. 

steam,  which  will  promote  the  action  of  the  skin  and  favor  mus- 
cular relaxation.  Even  after  removal  from  the  bath,  further  relaxa- 
tion may  be  obtained  by  the  abstraction  of  blood,  either  by  vene- 
section or  by  cupping  over  the  loins.  Provided  that  sickness  is  not 
severe,  it  is  frequently  advisable  to  employ  diluents,  as,  for  example, 
copious  draughts  of  milk,  or  of  beef -tea,  or  of  dilute  alkaline  solu- 
tions ;  these  favor  the  onward  movement  of  the  calculus,  and,  by 
reducing  the  acid  character  of  the  urine,  they  tend  still  further  to 
diminish  spasm  in  the  ureter.  Frequently,  however,  reflex  vomit- 
ing is  so  persistent  during  colic  that  it  is  impossible  to  administer 
food  or  drugs  by  the  mouth. 

When  the  pain  is  very  severe  it  may  sometimes  be  controlled  by 
the  administration  of  chloroform ;  bat  this  is  a  somewhat  unsatis- 
factory form  of  treatment,  since  it  does  not  favor  the  expulsion  of 
the  calculus,  and  although  it  affords  a  brief  period  of  relief,  the 
pain  returns  as  the  effect  of  the  anaesthetic  wears  off.  The  utmost 
that  can  be  said  for  the  use  of  an  anaesthetic  is  that  it  may  allow 
time  for  the  excretion  of  fluid  by  the  kidney,  which  will  favor  the 
dislodgement  of  the  calculus.  Even  this,  however,  is  a  somewhat 
delusive  hope,  since  the  angesthetic  may  itself  be  followed  by  vom- 
iting, and,  moreover,  during  the  time  of  its  employment  it  is  prob- 
able that  very  little  liquid  is  being  absorbed  from  the  digestive 
system. 

Of  recent  years  the  treatment  during  the  intervals  between  attacks 
of  renal  colic  has  been  considerably  modified.  It  was  at  one  time 
recommended  that  those  who  had  suffered  from  one  attack  should 
undergo  a  course  of  alkaline  treatment,  and  with  this  object  many 
patients  have  been  sent  to  various  foreign  spas,  where  alkaline  waters 
are  reputed  to  possess  solvent  properties.  Although  the  solvent 
action  is  open  to  dispute,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  copious  draughts 
of  these  waters  will,  by  flushing  the  kidney  with  liquid,  probably 
dislodge  and  remove  calculi  of  small  size.  This  course  of  treatment 
is  still  frequently  recommended,  but  modern  surgery  has  shown 
that  renal  calculi  are  most  satisfactorily  to  be  dealt  with  by  surgical 
interference,  since  it  may  be  possible  thas  to  avert  the  disorganiza- 
tion of  the  kidney,  which  so  often  ensues  after  repeated  irritation  by 
renal  calculi.  Unless  renal  calculi  are  very  numerous,  or  unless  the 
disorganization  of  the  kidney  has  already  reached  an  extreme  con- 
dition, it  is  generally  advisable  not  to  remove  the  kidney ;  indeed, 
cases  have  been  recorded  where  the  removal  of  the  kidney  has  been 


PYELITIS.  343 

followed  by  a  fatal  result,  owing  to  the  previous  disorganization  of 
the  opposite  kidney  by  other  calculi. 

Pyelitis.  Pyelitis  is  a  convenient  name  for  suppuration  of  the 
pelvis  of  the  kidney,  which  is  indicated  by  the  presence  of  pus  in 
the  urine,  and  often  by  pain  and  increased  frequency  of  micturition  ; 
the  last  two  symptoms,  however,  may  to  some  extent  render  the 
diagnosis  difficult.  The  bare  fact  of  suppuration  is  one  which  is  de- 
pendent upon  a  great  variety  of  causes,  and,  indeed,  pyelitis  might 
almost  be  regarded  as  a  symptom  of  some  underlying  disease  if  it 
were  not  that  this  suppurative  inflammation  of  the  pelvis  of  the 
kidney  will  start  a  cycle  of  symptoms  of  its  own. 

The  treatment  of  pyelitis  is  dependent  upon  the  cause,  and  very 
commonly  this  cause  lies  in  the  presence  of  renal  calculi ;  accord- 
ingly no  form  of  treatment  is  likely  to  be  of  much  service  unless 
these  calculi  can  be  removed.  It  must  not  be  forgotten,  however, 
that  the  irritation  produced  by  these  calculi  is  often  associated  with 
some  definite  alteration  in  the  urine,  as,  for  example,  over-acidity 
or  undue  concentration.  Both  of  these  conditions  may  be  satisfac- 
torily dealt  with  by  the  employment  of  alkalies  and  of  diluents, 
which  may  conveniently  be  given  together.  It  is  this  form  of  pye- 
litis which  is  so  often  benefited  by  a  visit  to  one  or  other  of  the 
alkaline  springs.  The  growth  of  the  calculi  may  in  this  way  be 
arrested,  while  the  excess  of  liquid  consumed  will  favor  their 
removal,  and  will  also  reduce  the  irritation  which  they  origi- 
nate. 

Pyelitis  is,  however,  often  dependent  upon  forms  of  obstruction, 
frequently  of  an  inflammatory  nature,  in  the  lower  part  of  the 
urinary  apparatus.  Thus  chronic  cystitis  may  be  followed  by 
pyelitis,  and  chronic  pyelitis  may  in  turn  result  from  gonorrhoeal 
infection,  or  from  retention  of  urine,  owing  to  enlargement  of  the 
prostate,  or  from  the  irritation  of  the  bladder  by  the  presence  of  a 
vesical  calculus.  The  form  of  treatment  appropriate  to  each  of 
these  conditions  is  sufficiently  indicated  in  their  enumeration,  since, 
under  these  various  circumstances  no  special  treatment  of  pyelitis 
will  be  of  much  service  so  long  as  the  cause  is  allowed  to  persist. 

There  is  a  special  form  of  pyelitis  which  occurs  in  connection  with 
some  of  the  infectious  fevers.  Thus  this  affection  may  arise  in  the 
course  of,  or  subsequent  to,  attacks  of  scarlet  fever,  of  diphtheria, 
of  typhoid,  and  of  smallpox,  while  it  is  sometimes  seen  after  pneu- 
monia.    In  this  form  of  pyelitis  hemorrhage  is  often  associated  with 


344  RENAL  DISEASES. 

the  pas,  but  the  hemorrhage  is  frequently  of  an  intermittent  char- 
acter. Pyelitis  of  this  nature  is  also  often  marked  by  great  oscilla- 
tions of  temperature,  as  well  as  by  the  occurrence  of  pain  primarily 
localized  in  the  region  of  the  kidney,  and  passing  thence  along  the 
ureter,  pain  in  the  bladder,  and  increased  frequency  of  micturition. 
In  these  diseases  the  patient  is  already  receiving  treatment  calculated 
to  prove  beneficial  at  the  time  when  pyelitis  is  developed  ;  thus  the 
restrictions  to  the  recumbent  posture  in  bed,  the  use  of  warm  cloth- 
ing and  of  a  diet  largely  consisting  of  liquids  will  already  have  been 
adopted  for  the  treatment  of  the  specific  fever. 

When  pyelitis  is  consecutive  to  cystitis,  unless  it  is  speedily 
relieved,  there  is  considerable  probability  of  an  extension  of  the 
disease  to  the  kidney  and  the  production  of  pyelonephritis.  Although 
this  condition  adds  largely  to  the  risk  of  this  affection,  it  is  not  pos- 
sible to  treat  it  separately.  Another  frequent  cause  of  pyelitis  lies 
in  tubercular  changes,  either  in  the  pelvis  of  the  kidney  or  in  the 
ureter,  leading  to  retention  and  to  consequent  irritation.  This  form 
of  pyelitis  readily  passes  on  to  the  production  of  pyonephrosis, 
which  will  require  separate  consideration.  Pending  the  determina- 
tion of  the  cause  of  the  pyelitis,  which  is  not  always  readily  appar- 
ent, the  patient  must  be  kept  in  bed  and  should  be  encouraged  to 
avoid  all  umiecessary  movements,  since  restlessness,  by  possibly 
altering  the  position  of  a  renal  calculus,  might  favor  an  extension 
of  the  disease. 

The  relief  or  diminution  of  pain  is  commonly  effected  by  the 
employment  of  warmth ;  hence,  poultices  or  fomentations  may  be 
applied  over  the  loins,  and  from  time  to  time  the  use  of  a  warm  sitz 
bath  may  be  advocated.  Further  relief  is  sometimes  afforded  by 
the  employment  of  fomentations  of  turpentine,  by  means  of  which 
a  considerable  degree  of  dilatation  of  the  superficial  vessels  may  be 
obtained.  Dry  cupping  over  the  loins  has  been  advocated,  and  will 
be  of  service  when  the  pain  is  of  an  intermittent  or  spasmodic  char- 
acter. With  the  view  of  further  reducing  pain,  it  is  always  desir- 
able to  encourage  the  employment  of  copious  draughts  of  bland, 
mucilaginous  drinks.  These  prove  beneficial  by  simple  dilution  of 
the  urine,  and  further  dilution  is  sometimes  obtained  by  the  em- 
ployment of  alkaline  diuretics.  Potassium  citrate  and  bicarbonate 
may  be  used,  and  are  frequently  more  readily  taken  if  administered 
in  an  effervescent  form.  The  value  of  these  remedies  is,  however, 
mainly  dependent  upon  the  resulting  alkalinity  of  the  urine,  and  in 


PYELITIS.  345 

general  it  is  better  to  avoid  the  employment  of  more  stimulating 
diuretics.  It  is  not  always  desirable,  however,  to  alter  the  reaction 
of  the  urine  by  these  salts ;  thus,  for  example,  where  the  pyelitis  is 
associated  with  cystitis  the  urine  is  frequently  alkaline,  ammoniacal, 
and  offensive,  and  these  conditions  may  be  increased  by  the  use  of 
alkalies,  while  remedies  which  tend  to  favor  the  acidity  of  the  urine, 
such  as  ammonium  benzoate  or  salicylic  acid,  may  be  preferable  on 
account  of  their  action  within  the  bladder. 

Another  compound  that  is  often  employed  with  benefit  under 
these  circumstances  is  boric  acid.  This  is  given  by  the  mouth,  in 
doses  of  from  5  to  15  grains,  and  it  may  be  administered  in  powders 
or  in  cachets,  or  it  may  be  given  in  solution  as  a  mixture.  Fre- 
quently the  pain  due  to  pyelitis  may  to  some  extent  be  controlled 
by  tincture  of  hyoscyamus,  which  in  doses  of  from  |^  to  1  fluidrachm 
appears  to  have  marked  power  of  controlling  pain,  both  in  the 
kidney  and  in  the  bladder.  The  sedative  action  of  hyoscyamus 
is  well  worth  bearing  in  mind  in  connection  with  all  forms  of  renal 
irritation,  especially  when  there  is  any  risk  of  the  existence  of 
chronic  renal  changes.  Under  such  circumstances  opium  and 
morphine  are  distinctly  dangerous,  and  hyoscyamus  or  hyoscine 
hydrobromate  will  often  enable  the  patient  to  derive  considerable 
relief  from  sleep,  even  though  this  may  be  accompanied  by  mild 
delirium. 

Whien,  in  spite  of  these  forms  of  treatment,  the  case  assumes  a 
chronic  form,  and  there  does  not  appear  to  be  any  sufficient  indica- 
tion for  direct  operative  interference,  further  measures  must  be 
adopted  to  counteract  the  exhausting  results  of  this  constant  forma- 
tion of  pus.  Although  the  appetite  is  usually  poor,  and  although 
nitrogenous  elements  of  food  must  be  reduced  in  amount,  these 
patients  will  frequently  do  well  with  an  almost  exclusive  milk  diet, 
or,  if  this  appears  to  be  too  repugnant  to  them,  milk  may  possibly 
still  form  the  main  element  of  the  diet  if  given  with  eggs,  with 
custards,  or  thickened  with  various  starchy  foods.  In  addition  to 
these,  however,  it  will  be  necessary  to  increase  the  nutrition  by  the 
administration  of  cod-liver  oil  and  the  frequent  employment  of  tinc- 
ture of  ferric  chloride.  Numerous  other  drugs  have  been  recom- 
mended with  the  idea  of  diminishing  or  of  arresting  the  formation 
of  pus.  Those  which  have  given  the  greatest  satisfaction  are  astrin- 
gent preparations,  as,  for  example,  tannic  acid,  alum,  and  lead  ace- 
tate.    The  waters  of  the  various  alum  springs  of  Virginia  have  been 


346  BENAL  DISEASES. 

employed  in  pyelitis  on  account  of  their  astringent  properties  due  to 
the  presence  of  a  fairly  large  proportion  of  alum. 

Hydronephrosis.  This  term  indicates  an  over-distention  of  the 
pelvis  of  the  kidney  with  urine,  owing  to  some  obstruction  in  the 
course  of  the  ureter.  This  obstruction  may  be  due  to  a  calculus 
which  has  become  impacted,  or  it  may  result  from  alterations  within 
the  ureter,  such,  for  example,  as  ulcerations,  or  possibly  it  may  be 
due  to  some  kinking  of  the  ureter  owing  to  dislocation  of  the  kid- 
ney. The  ulcerations  in  the  ureter  which  lead  to  hydronephrosis  are 
commonly  tubercular,  and  the  hydronephrosis  which  results  from 
this  cause  is  frequently  of  an  intermittent  type,  since  the  obstruc- 
tion to  the  outflow  of  urine  is  generally  formed  by  a  plug  of  sup- 
purative origin,  which  occludes  the  narrowed  calibre  of  the  ureter. 
This  plug  may  sometimes  be  dislodged  by  the  pressure  of  the  urine, 
or  even  by  manipulative  measures  over  the  abdominal  wall,  and 
occasionally  it  may  possibly  be  dislodged  as  a  consequence  of  the 
contortions  of  the  patient  due  to  the  pain.  Similarly  the  form  of 
hydronephrosis  due  to  alterations  in  the  length  of  the  ureter  is  some- 
times intermittent.  The  tumor  in  the  region  of  the  kidney  may 
attain  considerable  size,  and  may  produce  very  much  pain  ;  both 
these  conditions  are  sometimes  relieved  with  comparative  sudden- 
ness and  with  the  passage  of  an  increased  amount  of  urine.  The 
hydronephritic  tumor  may,  however,  remain  the  same  size  for  a  long 
while,  or  it  may  undergo  gradual  diminution  in  size,  when  in  all 
probability  the  urine  is  slowly  reabsorbed,  since  the  diminution  in 
the  size  of  the  tumor,  when  unaccompanied  by  an  increased  outflow 
of  urine,  is  invariably  associated  with  considerable  headache  and 
constitutional  disturbance. 

Another  form  of  hydronephrosis  seen  in  children  is  probably  con- 
genital, owing  to  the  ureter  being  impervious  Hydronephrosis  may 
also  result  from  pressure  on  the  ureter  from  without,  such  as  might 
follow  the  growth  of  pelvic  tumors,  as,  for  example,  of  ovarian  cysts, 
or  of  cancer  of  the  pelvic  organs  ;  while  closure  of  the  orifice  of  the 
ureter  may  be  due  to  papillomata  or  other  growths  developing  within 
the  wall  of  the  bladder. 

The  prominent  symptoms  resulting  from  this  affection  in  an 
advanced  stage  are  pain  in  the  back,  comparative  frequency  of 
micturition,  and  diminution  in  the  daily  amount  of  urine  excreted 
while,  in  addition,  if  the  hydronephrosis  persists,  ursemic  symptoms 
may  be  developed.     When  the  renal  tumor  is  of  large  size  the  pain 


HYDRONEPHROSIS.  347 

may  be  of  an  agonizing  character,  and  even  when  it  is  of  moderate 
dimensions  the  patient  may  complain  of  a  sense  of  weight  over  the 
affected  side. 

The  treatment  of  cases  of  hydronephrosis  is  mainly  surgical,  but, 
pending  a  decision  concerning  the  operation  to  be  performed,  it  will 
generally  be  advisable  to  employ  anodynes  to  afford  temporary  relief. 
The  most  valuable,  when  it  can  be  used,  is,  of  course,  morphine,  but 
considerable  discretion  must  be  shown  in  the  selection  of  the  cases 
in  which  morphine  is  to  be  employed.  If  the  age  of  the  patient, 
the  character  of  the  pulse,  and  the  sounds  of  the  heart  indicate  the 
probability  of  serious  chronic  renal  changes  superadded  to  the  hydro- 
nephrosis, it  will  in  general  be  inexpedient  to  administer  morphine, 
or  if  used  at  all,  the  smallest  doses  consistent  with  the  relief  of  pain 
should  be  given. 

In  cases  of  intermittent  hydronephrosis,  the  indications  for  treat- 
ment will  have  been  ascertained  in  the  intervals  between  the  separate 
attacks ;  thus,  during  these  intervals  the  urine  must  be  examined  to 
ascertain  whether  albumin  and  renal  casts  are  present  in  sufficient 
quantity  to  indicate  the  existence  of  chronic  renal  changes,  while, 
on  the  other  hand,  the  occurrence  of  hsematuria  at  the  commence- 
ment of  an  attack  will  afford  some  presumptive  evidence  in  favor  of 
the  existence  of  a  renal  calculus  as  the  cause  of  the  hydronephrosis. 
In  those  cases,  however,  which  do  not  appear  to  be  intermittent, 
when  the  patient  first  comes  under  treatment  for  hydronephrosis  the 
question  of  the  employment  of  morphine  may  generally  be  deter- 
mined by  the  presence  or  absence  of  albumin  from  the  water,  though 
this  only  indicates  the  character  of  the  work  being  performed  by  the 
kidney  which  is  not  affected  by  hydronephrosis. 

Independently  of  the  employment  of  morphine,  it  is  necessary  to 
keep  the  patient  in  bed,  lying  on  his  back,  with  his  head  slightly 
raised ;  the  knees  will  naturally  be  drawn  up  to  diminish  abdom- 
inal tension  as  much  as  possible.  Occasionally  some  measure  of 
relief  may  be  obtained  from  the  employment  of  fomentations  over 
the  region  of  the  kidney,  and  also  over  the  front  of  the  abdomen, 
when  the  renal  tumor  can  be  felt  through  the  abdominal  wall. 
Further  relief  may  be  afforded  by  the  use  of  hydragogue  purga- 
tives, since  they  diminish  the  excretory  work  of  the  kidney,  and 
thus  prevent  the  further  enlargement  of  the  tumor.  Even  when 
the  irregular  contractions  induced  by  the  administration  of  hydra- 
gogue purgatives  increase  the  pain,  it  will  still  be  necessary  to  favor 


348  BENAL  DISEASES. 

further  frequent  action  of  the  bowel  by  the  employment  of  glycerin 
suppositorieSj  or  of  glycerin  enemata. 

The  presence  of  hydronephrosis  is  commonly  associated  with 
diminution  of  appetite  and  of  thirst,  while  sometimes  the  pain  may 
be  sufficient  to  produce  sickness.  For  all  these  reasons,  therefore, 
the  diet  will  require  considerable  management,  so  as  to  be  as  nutri- 
tious as  possible  while  taken  in  small  bulk.  Various  forms  of  beef- 
tea  or  of  concentrated  meat  essences  may  be  used,  and  ice  or  iced 
water  may  be  given,  which  will  tend  to  diminish  the  frequency  of 
vomiting.  The  copious  alkaline  draughts  which  have  been  men- 
tioned as  so  serviceable  in  connection  with  renal  calculus  are  gener- 
ally inadvisable  in  hydronephrosis,  since  the  presence  of  the  renal 
tumor  shows  that  the  pressure  due  to  the  accumulation  of  the  j&uid 
in  the  pelvis  of  the  kidney  is  insufficient  to  remove  the  obstruction 
to  the  outflow  of  the  urine. 

The  surgical  treatment  will  necessarily  depend  upon  the  diagnosis. 
When  the  pain  is  severe,  aspiration  of  the  pelvis  of  the  kidney  has 
been  recommended,  but  this  is  merely  a  palliative  measure  ;  the  fluid 
commonly  reaccumulates  quickly,  and  other  treatment  has  to  be 
adopted.  When  dependent  upon  renal  calculus,  it  is  generally 
necessary  to  remove  the  kidney,  since  the  renal  tissue  has  probably 
been  considerably  disorganized,  owing  to  the  pressure  due  to  repeated 
attacks  of  hydronephrosis.  When  no  calculus  can  be  found,  and 
when  the  kidney  appears  to  be  dislocated,  the  condition  is  sometimes 
dealt  with  by  fixing  the  kidney  in  its  proper  site  by  ligatures.  This 
operation  is  sometimes  successful  when  the  hydronephrosis  is  due  to 
dislocation  of  the  kidney  and  alterations  in  the  length  of  the  ureter ; 
and  although  in  itself  severe,  the  risks  of  removal  of  the  kidney  are 
so  great  that  it  is  often  better  for  this  operation  to  be  performed, 
and  for  the  results  to  be  watched,  before  deciding  upon  the  removal 
of  an  apparently  healthy  kidney. 


CHAPTER   XV. 

EENAL   BIBEASBS— Continued. 

Acute  Nephritis — Scarlatinal  Nephritis— Chronic  Nephritis — Cirrhosis  of 

the  Kidney. 

Acute  Nephritis.  The  treatment  of  acute  nephritis  depends  upon 
the  stage  of  the  disease  when  the  patient  first  comes  under  observa- 
tion and  upon  the  predominant  symptoms.  When  arising  from  cold, 
or  from  exposure  to  wet,  the  onset  may  sometimes  be  gradual.  Fre- 
quently, however,  when  first  seen,  there  is  marked  diminution  in  the 
daily  excretion  of  urine,  and  the  urine  is  altered  by  the  presence  of 
blood  and  of  lithates.  Microscopical  examination  reveals  the  pres- 
ence of  free  blood-corpuscles,  of  blood  casts,  and  of  renal  epithelium. 
These  alterations  in  the  urine  are  associated  with  abnormal  frequency 
of  micturition,  the  urine  being  voided  in  small  quantities  with  con- 
siderable discomfort. 

Apart  from  these  changes,  there  will  be  complaint  of  severe  head- 
ache, and  possibly  of  nausea  or  sickness.  These  symptoms  are 
frequently  closely  followed  by  dropsical  effusions  into  the  subcuta- 
neous tissues,  which  alter  the  appearance  of  the  patient,  the  features 
being  obliterated,  the  eyes  almost  closed,  while  the  face  is  character- 
ized by  marked  pallor,  due  rather  to  the  oedema  of  the  subcutaneous 
tissues  than  to  the  loss  of  blood  in  the  urine. 

The  leading  indications  during  early  days  are  to  secure  physio- 
logical rest  for  the  kidney,  to  diminish  the  risks  of  extension  of  the 
disease,  and  to  counteract  the  dangers  which  result  from  interference 
with  the  eliminative  work  of  the  kidney.  These  indications  hold 
good  in  nearly  every  case ;  hence,  the  following  general  treatment 
may  mostly  be  adopted. 

As  soon  as  a  diagnosis  of  acute  nephritis  has  been  made,  the 
patient  should  be  kept  in  bed,  and  the  action  of  the  skin  promoted 
by  the  use  of  woollen  garments,  while  chill  should  be  avoided  by 
the  removal  of  the  sheets.  The  dietary  should,  at  the  commence- 
ment, be  as  non-nitrogenous  as  possible,  and  should  be  limited  to 
the  smallest  amount  consistent  with  the  maintenance  of  strength. 


350  RENAL  DISEASES. 

As  a  general  rule,  patients  should  be  kept  on  a  strict  milk  diet,  and 
the  milk  may  be  given  either  cold  or  slightly  warmed,  in  quantities 
of  half  a  pint  at  a  time.  It  is  advisable  to  continue  the  use  of  a 
milk  diet  until  far  into  the  stage  of  convalescence,  since  it  is  often 
found  that  the  early  use  of  solid  nourishment  entails  a  return  of 
hsematuria. 

Occasionally  it  will  be  found  that  patients  rebel  against  this  form 
of  treatment,  partly  with  the  idea  that  they  are  receiving  insufficient 
nourishment,  partly  from  distaste.  When  difficulty  arises  from  either 
of  these  causes,  a  little  gentle  persistence  may  suffice  to  enable  the 
treatment  to  be  continued.  It  is  sometimes  found,  however,  that 
the  milk  undoubtedly  produces  dyspeptic  symptoms,  and  skimmed 
milk  may  then  be  substituted,  though  it  has  the  disadvantage  of 
favoring  constipation. 

During  the  early  days  of  treatment,  thirst  may  be  allayed  by  the 
use  of  barley  water  or  thin  arrowroot,  and  when  the  patient  is  wholly 
unable  to  take  pure  milk  diet,  these  may  be  given  in  conjunction 
with  beef -tea ;  though,  as  already  indicated,  it  is,  in  general,  prefer- 
able to  avoid  the  use  of  nitrogenous  forms  of  diet.  It  sometimes 
appears  that  the  milk  disagrees,  owing  to  its  administration  in  too 
large  quantities  at  the  commencement  of  the  treatment ;  hence,  it  is 
advisable  to  use  only  small  quantities  of  milk  at  intervals  during 
the  first  few  days,  and  to  increase  the  amount  gradually  as  tolera- 
tion is  established,  and  as  the  urine  becomes  less  deeply  tinged  with 
blood.  Later,  the  patient  should  be  encouraged  to  take  "  imperial 
drink,"  made  as  follows  :  Two  drachms  of  potassium  bitartrate  are 
placed  in  a  large  jug,  the  juice  of  one  lemon  and  some  sugar  or  syrup 
are  added,  and  two  pints  of  boiling  water  poured  in,  the  ingredients 
being  well  mixed.  When  cool,  the  drink  may  be  placed  by  the  bed- 
side, and  taken  when  desired. 

During  the  treatment  of  acute  nephritis  three  dangers  must  be 
kept  in  mind  :  First,  the  danger  of  suppression  of  urine ;  second,  that 
of  interference  with  respiration  and  with  circulation ;  and,  third,  the 
more  remote  danger  of  the  establishment  of  chronic  renal  nephritis. 
The  first  of  these  dangers,  that  of  suppression,  is  best  averted  by  the 
early  re-establishment  of  the  interrupted  functions  of  the  kidney, 
and  since  this  interrupted  function  depends  upon  extreme  engorge- 
ment of  the  renal  vessels,  efforts  must  be  directed  toward  the  relief 
of  engorgement  and  of  the  symptoms  which  are  the  direct  result  of 
this  engorgement. 


ACUTE  NEPHRITIS.  351 

These  indications  entail  the  removal  of  fluid  from  the  bloodvessels 
and  from  the  subcutaneous  tissues,  and  this  removal  can,  as  a  rule, 
be  stimulated  either  by  diaphoretics,  by  hydragogue  purgatives,  or 
by  diuretics.  Since,  however,  most  diuretics  cause  an  increase  in 
the  calibre  of  the  renal  vessels,  and  thus  tend  to  promote  engorge- 
ment, it  is  essential  to  place  full  reliance  upon  diaphoretic  measures 
and  drugs  and  upon  hydragogue  purgatives. 

Frequently  there  is  some  degree  of  constipation  at  the  commence- 
ment of  the  attack,  and  this,  in  addition  to  the  presence  of  dropsy, 
indicates  the  desirability  of  using  purgative  remedies,  and  of  these 
the  salines  and  mild  hydragogues  are  preferable  to  mercurials,  since 
the  latter  often  favor  diuretic  action.  When  dropsy  is  extreme, 
headache  severe,  and  when  convulsions  occur,  the  use  of  purgatives 
becomes  imperative.  In  the  milder  cases  full  doses  of  magnesium 
sulphate  may  be  employed  ;  but  when  dealing  with  cases  of  greater 
severity,  compound  jalap  powder  is  generally  followed  by  good 
results,  although  some  practitioners  prefer  to  substitute  resin  of 
scammony,  with  potassium  bitartrate,  in  the  proportions  present  in 
the  compound  jalap  powder.  Should  convulsions  have  been  followed 
by  coma,  the  administration  of  these  remedies  becomes  a  matter  of 
extreme  difficulty,  and  it  will  be  advisable  to  use  croton  oil  in  doses 
of  one-third  of  a  minim  and  upward,  so  as  to  secure  prompt  evacua- 
tion of  the  intestine. 

Later  in  the  course  of  this  disease,  when  the  urine  has  lost  its 
smoky  character,  mercurials,  such  as  calomel,  may  be  given  occa- 
sionally, since  at  this  time  there  is  distinct  advantage  in  favoring 
diuretic  action ;  but  when  calomel  is  given  at  night-time  it  should 
be  followed  in  the  morning  by  the  administration  of  a  saline  purge, 
so  as  to  remove  the  mercury  quickly  from  the  system  and  to  prevent 
any  prolonged  irritating  action  upon  the  renal  vessels.  Although 
the  mercury  is  distinctly  beneficial  in  the  treatment  of  dropsy,  it  is 
a  somewhat  dangerous  drug  to  employ  early  in  the  course  of  acute 
nephritis,  and  it  gives  better  results  in  connection  with  the  dropsy 
of  heart  disease,  where  a  prejudicial  influence  upon  the  kidney  is 
not  so  much  to  be  feared. 

Pending  the  action  of  these  purgatives  it  is  desirable  to  favor 
diaphoresis  by  the  wet  pack  or  by  the  vapor  bath.  The  latter  is 
usually  the  more  prompt  in  action,  and  is,  therefore,  generally  em- 
ployed if  available,  but  there  are  strong  objections  to  the  use  of  the 
vapor  bath ;  it  often  entails  placing  the  patient  in  a  chair,  envelop- 


352  RENAL  DISEASES. 

ing  him  with  blankets,  and  allowing  a  spirit  lamp,  with  a  large  wick, 
to  burn  under  the  chair.  These  objections  are  to  be  found  not  only 
in  the  risks  of  igniting  the  woodwork  or  the  bedclothes,  but  also  in 
the  necessary  but  undesirable  movement  of  the  patient.  It  is  pos- 
sible to  arrange  for  a  vapor  bath  by  supporting  the  bedclothes  with 
low  stools  or  with  barrel-hoops,  but  it  is  still  somewhat  difficult  to 
arrange  the  lamp  so  that  the  vapor  may  pass  around  the  patient 
without  risk. 

When  there  are  suitable  appliances,  as  in  hospitals,  the  vapor  bath 
is  of  extreme  service,  but  it  is  necessary  to  be  extremely  careful 
that  the  tube  of  the  steam  kettle  can  by  no  possibility  come  into 
contact  with  the  patient's  limbs,  since  the  cutaneous  sensibility  is 
so  far  reduced  that  severe  blistering  may  occur  before  there  is  any 
complaint  of  pain.  In  cases  where  the  dropsy  is  not  so  severe  the 
vapor  bath  is  scarcely  required  unless  great  difficulty  is  experienced 
in  producing  diaphoresis  by  means  of  the  wet  pack  or  by  the  admin- 
istration of  diaphoretic  remedies. 

The  wet  pack  may  be  used  either  hot  or  cold,  and  of  the  two  the 
latter  is  generally  preferred,  since  although  some  degree  of  shock  is 
excited  at  the  moment  of  application,  this  is  speedily  followed  by 
reaction ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  use  of  the  warm  pack  may 
occasionally  produce  much  discomfort,  owing  to  the  fall  of  tempera- 
ture after  application. 

In  applying  the  pack  the  patient  should  be  completely  undressed, 
or  should  only  wear  a  thin  cotton  covering,  and  wet  sheets  should  be 
wrapped  around  him  and  then  quickly  covered  with  successive  layers 
of  dry  blankets.  Care  should  be  taken  to  leave  no  portion  of  the 
damp  sheet  projecting  beyond  the  blankets.  The  time  spent  in  the 
wet  pack  must  be  determined  by  the  resulting  diaphoresis.  Copious 
perspiration  usually  ensues  after  twenty  minutes  or  half  an  hour, 
and,  under  suitable  conditions,  this  diaphoretic  action  will  be  con- 
tinued after  the  removal  of  the  pack,  if  the  surface  is  quickly  dried 
with  warm  towels  and  the  patient  again  enveloped  in  warm  blankets. 
Greater  freedom  of  perspiration  may  be  favored  during  the  employ- 
ment of  the  wet  pack  by  allowing  the  patient  to  drink  draughts  of 
water  from  time  to  time. 

The  first  application  of  the  wet  pack  sometimes  fails,  and  may 
indeed  produce  increased  headache  ;  while  a  second  application, 
repeated  twelve  or  twenty-four  hours  later,  is  often  successful.  In 
uncomplicated  cases,  when  diaphoresis  is  somewhat  slow  in  occur- 


ACUTE  NEPHRITIS.  353 

ring,  it  may  be  favored,  or  initiated,  by  the  administration  of  rela- 
tively small  doses  of  pilocarpine  nitrate.  It  is  comparatively  rarely, 
however,  that  this  drug  is  required  in  acute  nephritis,  and  its  em- 
ployment should,  if  possible,  be  avoided,  since  it  frequently  causes 
much  salivation  and  depression. 

As  the  combined  result  of  the  use  of  hydragogue  purgatives  and 
of  the  above-mentioned  measures,  the  dropsy  often  diminishes  rap- 
idly, and  the  urine  increases  in  quantity  ;  these  improvements  are 
indications  that  the  renal  engorgement  has  diminished,  which  is 
further  shown  by  the  rapid  disappearance  of  blood  from  the  urine. 
With  these  signs  of  improvement  alkaline  diuretics  may  be  em- 
ployed, such  as  potassium  or  sodium  acetate,  or  citrate.  The  late 
Sir  William  Roberts  recommended  that  these  drugs  should  be  em- 
ployed from  the  commencement  of  the  attack,  and  he  maintained 
that  by  rendering  the  urine  alkaline  it  was  possible  to  prevent  the 
coagulation  of  blood  or  albumin  within  the  tubules,  which,  under  ordi- 
nary conditions,  is  favored  by  the  highly  acid  character  of  the  urine. 

These  alkaline  diuretics  are  converted  into  alkaline  carbonates 
prior  to  their  elimination,  and  thus  undoubtedly  they  would  prevent 
the  obstruction  of  the  tubules  by  coagula.  This  obstruction  would 
favor  the  subsequent  development  of  chronic  nephritis,  and  these 
salts  would,  therefore,  be  extremely  useful  if  it  were  not  for  their 
powerful  diuretic  action,  which  is  undesirable  in  the  initial  stage  of 
engorgement.  Such  objection  to  their  use  does  not,  however,  obtain 
when  the  engorgement  has  been  relieved  by  other  measures ;  and 
these  drugs  are  then  of  extreme  value,  and  they  may  be  employed 
in  conjunction  with  small  doses  of  digitalis,  especially  if  the  heart's 
action  is  unduly  rapid. 

Digitalis  is,  however,  of  greater  service  in  the  treatment  of  chronic 
nephritis  associated  with  dropsy,  since  the  dropsy  of  the  later  stages 
of  chronic  nephritis  is  often,  to  a  large  extent,  due  to  circulatory 
failure. 

In  acute  nephritis  caffeine  has  been  recommended  instead  of  digi- 
talis, and  it  has  the  advantage  not  only  of  being  an  efficient  diuretic, 
but  also  of  causing  less  digestive  disturbance. 

Apart  from  dropsy,  the  chief  symptoms  calling  for  special  treat- 
ment are  those  connected  with  the  nervous  system.  Headache  may 
be  severe,  and  it  is  frequently  associated  with  much  restlessness  and 
sleeplessness.  These  symptoms  are  sometimes  relieved  by  purga- 
tives, diuretics,  and  diaphoretics,  but  occasionally  they  require  spe- 

23 


354  BENAL  DISEASES. 

cial  treatment,  such  as  the  administration  of  bromides,  of  chloral, 
or  of  other  sedatives.  Bromides  and  chloral  are  extremely  service- 
able, provided  that  the  pulse  is  of  good  quality,  but  when  the  pulse 
is  small  and  the  heart's  action  is  rapid,  other  sedative  measures  must 
be  used,  as  the  cardiac  weakness  might  be  increased  by  bromides  or 
by  chloral. 

Morphine  and  opium  are  contraindicated,  since  they  have  been 
known  to  favor  dangerous  suppression  and  the  development  of 
ursemic  symptoms.  Hyoscine  hydrobromate  and  liyoscy amine  sul- 
phate are  free  from  these  dangers,  and  can  be  given  subcutaneously 
in  doses  of  -^^-^  grain  to  j^q-  grain.  The  sleep  they  induce  may 
occasionally  be  interrupted  by  dreams,  but  it  is  refreshing,  and  it 
diminishes  the  restlessness  of  the  ensuing  day.  In  severe  cases 
these  remedies  may  be  employed  during  the  day  in  small  doses,  as 
well  as  in  larger  doses  at  night-time  to  produce  sleep. 

Persistent  vomiting  is  always  an  indication  of  danger,  since  it  is 
most  likely  to  arise  when  the  eliminative  functions  of  the  kidney 
are  seriously  interfered  with.  If  it  occurs  early  in  the  course  of 
the  disease,  relief  may  sometimes  be  afforded  by  the  use  of  diluted 
hydrocyanic  acid  and  preparations  of  bismuth ;  but,  although  these 
allay  gastric  irritation,  they  are  comparatively  useless  when  the 
symptom  is  an  indication  of  uraemia,  and  reliance  must  then  be 
placed  upon  the  use  of  diaphoretics  and  hydragogue  purgatives. 

During  convalescence  persistent  albuminuria  may  call  for  special 
attention.  Persalts  of  iron  have  been  given  with  digitalis  and  stro- 
phanthus  to  diminish  the  loss  of  albumin ;  but  iron  salts  must  be 
used  with  discretion,  since  the  daily  loss  is  sometimes  increased  dur- 
ing the  time  that  they  are  taken.  Various  astringents  have  been 
employed  with  the  same  object,  such  as  tannic  acid  and  gallic  acid, 
and  occasionally  I  have  found  some  benefit  result  from  the  use  of 
ergot.  Lactate  of  strontium  has  been  recommended  in  30-grain  doses, 
administered  three  times  a  day,  and  it  is  said  to  reduce  the  loss  of 
albumin,  although  it  has  no  action  upon  the  diseased  process.  Per- 
sistent albuminuria  is,  however,  much  more  amenable  to  hygienic 
than  to  medicinal  treatment,  and  it  may  often  be  reduced  by  a  rever- 
sion to  milk  diet,  by  the  avoidance  of  cold  and  of  muscular  and 
mental  strain.  It  is  during  the  stage  of  convalescence  that  patients 
require  the  greatest  watchfulness  and  care,  since  an  early  resumption 
of  solid  diet  may  be  followed  by  an  increase  of  albuminuria,  and 
possibly  also  by  a  return  of  hsematuria  and  dropsy. 


SCARLATINAL  NEPHRITIS.  355 

Although  the  chief  dangers  of  acute  nephritis  are  those  which 
ensue  from  dropsy  and  from  uraemia,  alterations  in  the  respiratory 
system  and  in  the  circulatory  system  may  occur  as  serious  complica- 
tions ;  thus,  for  example,  pleurisy  is  comparatively  frequent,  and 
may  occasionally  pass  into  empyema.  Pneumonia  and  bronchitis 
may  develop  in  severe  cases  ;  but  in  the  milder  cases,  which  result 
from  exposure  to  cold,  some  degree  of  congestion  of  the  lungs  may 
arise  without  adding  very  greatly  to  tlie  risks.  The  circulatory 
alterations  are  less  frequent  with  acute  nephritis  than  with  chronic 
nephritis.  Acute  enlargement  of  the  ventricles  may  occur,  and  will 
then  serve  as  an  indication  for  the  use  of  digitalis  or  strophanthus. 
This  dilatation,  however,  is  not  often  an  indication  of  marked  dan- 
ger, and  it  diminishes  rapidly  with  the  general  improvement.  Alter- 
ations in  the  blood  certainly  occur,  but  not  to  the  extent  which 
appears  to  be  indicated  by  the  pallor,  the  actual  reduction  in  the 
number  of  red  corpuscles  being  by  no  means  to  be  measured  by  the 
whiteness  of  the  skin,  which  results  from  dropsical  infiltration 
rather  than  from  blood  changes. 

During  convalescence,  however,  the  anaemia  affords  an  indication 
for  the  use  of  mild  preparations  of  iron.  The  stronger  astringent 
preparations  should  in  general  be  avoided,  since  they  may  increase 
the  amount  of  albumin  in  the  water,  and  may  also  favor  undesirable 
constipation. 

Yet  more  dangerous  than  the  above-mentioned  changes  are  the 
inflammatory  affections  connected  with  the  pericardium.  These  may 
cause  much  distress  and  pain,  and  occasionally  the  accumulation 
within  the  pericardium  may  be  large  in  amount.  Symptoms  of 
pericarditis  will  call  for  the  use  of  leeches  and  of  poultices  over 
the  pericardium,  but  the  nature  of  the  renal  changes  will  contra- 
indicate  the  internal  use  of  opium. 

Another  fairly  frequent  complication  of  this  disease  is  oedema  of 
the  larynx,  which  may  develop  in  connection  with  dropsical  effusion 
in  the  extremities,  and  may  necessitate  the  employment  of  intuba- 
tion or  the  performance  of  tracheotomy.  OEdema  of  the  larynx  is, 
however,  often  associated  with  oedema  of  the  bronchi  and  of  the 
lungs — conditions  which  it  is  impossible  to  relieve  by  any  operative 
measures  other  than  those  usually  employed  for  dropsical  affections 
in  other  parts. 

Scarlatinal  Nephritis.  The  treatment  of  scarlatinal  nephritis 
differs  but  little  from  that  of  the  foregoing  disease,  although  some 


366  RENAL  DISEASES. 

of  the  symptoms  occur  with  greater  frequency ;  this  variety  of 
nephritis,  however,  occurs  under  such  special  conditions  that  it 
merits  separate  consideration.  The  intimate  connection  with  scarlet 
fever  indicates  that  it  depends  primarily  upon  the  irritation  of  some 
poison  peculiar  to  this  fever,  but  the  development  of  this  poison  and 
the  consequent  frequency  of  scarlatinal  nephritis  vary  greatly  in 
different  epidemics. 

In  the  earlier  stages  of  scarlet  fever  some  albuminuria  is  often 
met  with,  this  being,  in  all  probability,  of  the  simple  febrile  form. 
True  nephritis,  however,  is  usually  a  late  development  or  complica- 
tion, and  it  appears  to  have  very  little  dependence  upon  the  severity 
of  the  original  attack  ;  indeed,  it  may  occur  when  the  attack  of  fever 
has  been  so  slight  as  to  have  almost  escaped  observation.  Although 
the  development  of  scarlatinal  nephritis  is  frequently  attributed  to 
undue  exposure  to  cold,  especially  during  the  stage  of  desquamation, 
it  has  been  found  that  with  patients  in  hospitals  the  development 
certainly  depends  partly  upon  the  degree  of  humidity  of  the  atmos- 
phere. Damp,  cold,  and  muggy  days  are  marked  by  the  coincidence 
of  several  fresh  cases,  while,  in  the  slighter  forms  of  scarlatinal  neph- 
ritis, a  return  of  bright  weather  is  often  associated  with  rapid  im- 
provement. 

There  is  some  reason  to  believe  that  the  onset  is  also  favored  by 
constipation,  and  it  is,  therefore,  desirable  during  convalescence 
from  scarlet  fever  to  prevent  any  such  tendency  by  the  frequent 
administration  of  some  mild  laxative.  The  character  of  the  diet, 
too,  has  some  influence,  and  with  children  from  three  to  six  years 
old  it  is  advisable  to  confine  the  diet  mainly  to  milk  during  the  time 
of  desquamation,  and  to  keep  the  patient  in  bed,  not  only  with  the 
object  of  diminishing  the  risk  of  spreading  infection,  but  also  to 
prevent  any  possible  dangers  which  might  result  from  exposure  or 
from  violent  exercise. 

The  transition  from  simple  albuminuria  to  definite  scarlatinal 
nephritis  is  often  somewhat  abrupt — that  is  to  say,  that  although 
a  mild  form  of  albuminuria  may  have  been  noted  for  many  days, 
the  distinct  onset  of  scarlatinal  nephritis  is  marked  by  a  rise  of  tem- 
perature and  by  an  increased  severity  of  other  symptoms,  such  as 
headache,  oedema,  and  the  characteristic  alterations  of  the  urine. 
Hence,  during  convalescence  from  scarlet  fever  it  is  desirable  to 
avoid  the  use  of  any  drugs — such  as  salicylates  or  potassium  chlo- 
I'ate — which  favor  the  development  of  albuminuria.     The  rise  of 


SCARLATINAL  NEPHRITIS.  357 

temperature  to  101°  or  102°,  which  forms  the  immediate  prelude  to 
scarlatinal  nephritis,  occurs  commonly  toward  the  end  of  the  second 
or  during  the  third  week.  This  rise  of  temperature  has  been  treated 
beneficially  with  repeated  small  doses  of  tincture  of  aconite.  Very 
often,  however,  this  initial  rise  of  temperature  may  escape  observa- 
tion, and  the  disease,  for  practical  purposes,  assumes  the  form  of 
acute  nephritis,  in  wliich  there  is  a  great  tendency  to  the  develop- 
ment of  symptoms  of  uraemia.  Ursemic  convulsions  may  occur  very 
early,  and  may  be  followed  or  sometimes  preceded  by  vomiting, 
drowsiness,  and  alterations  in  the  frequency  of  the  pulse. 

The  treatment  of  dropsy  and  of  these  urgemic  symptoms  does  not 
differ  from  that  already  described  with  acute  nephritis.  Dr.  F. 
Detlefsen,^  of  Chicago  (Pediatrics,  January  15,  1898,  p.  47),  con- 
siders that  diaphoresis  should  be  moderate  and  followed  by  the 
ingestion  of  plentiful  fluids,  for  a  favorable  excretion  by  means  of 
the  sweat-glands  is  not  void  of  danger,  because  the  loss  of  fluid  is 
too  great  in  comparison  with  the  amount  of  urea  excreted.  The 
diaphoretic  he  prefers  is  a  warm  bath  of  98°  to  100°  F.  for  fifteen 
or  twenty  minutes  or  less.  Daring  the  bathing  cold  compresses  are 
applied  to  the  head,  and  the  child  is  afterward  put  into  bed  in  a 
warm  blanket.  He  recommends  that  if  perspiration  is  not  free,  hot 
drinks  or  an  infusion  of  jaborandi,  or  pilocarpine,  may  be  given, 
though  the  latter  is  very  depressing.  Occasionally  discomfort  in 
the  lumbar  region  may  call  for  local  treatment.  Hot  fomentations 
may  be  employed  over  the  loins,  or,  if  the  pain  is  very  severe,  a  few 
leeches  may  be  used.  The  dietary  is  an  important  consideration, 
since  the  duration  of  the  albuminuria  is  liable  to  be  increased  by 
resuming  solids  at  too  early  a  stage.  Dr.  Detlefsen  considers  an 
absolutely  milk  diet  too  rich  in  nitrogen,  and  that  gruel  or  soups 
of  barley  and  other  farinacea  and  cooked  fruits  should  be  given. 
Eggs  are  frequently  rigidly  excluded  from  the  diet ;  but  when  there 
is  much  ansemia  they  appear  to  be  beneficial  in  the  form  of  a  light 
custard  or  if  beaten  up  with  milk.  They  are  certainly  prejudicial 
if  given  hard-boiled. 

When  the  immediate  urgency  of  the  symptoms  has  passed  away, 
benefit  will  often  result  from  the  use  of  perchloride  of  iron.  This 
must  be  employed  tentatively,  and  its  administration  checked  if  the 
albaminuria  is  found  to  be  increased.     Frequently,  however,  it  not 

1  Year-Book  of  Treatment,  1899,  p.  156. 


358  RENAL  DISEASES. 

only  acts  as  a  hsematinic,  but  to  some  extent  it  reduces  the  amount 
of  hsematuria.  The  administration  of  iron,  however,  will  entail  the 
use  of  magnesium  suljDhate,  or  some  other  saline  piu^gative,  to  coun- 
teract the  liability  to  constipation. 

Quinine  is  also  usually  beneficial  in  this  disease  when  the  imme- 
diate urgency  of  the  symptoms  is  over,  and  small  doses  of  tincture 
of  digitalis,  or  of  strophanthus,  are  occasionally  of  service  when 
there  is  much  weakness  of  the  pulse. 

Although  the  great  majority  of  cases  of  scarlatinal  nephritis  recover 
in  two  to  three  weeks,  the  disease  is  frequently  marked  by  complica- 
tions of  greater  severity  than  in  ordinary  acute  nephritis,  and  espe- 
cially by  an  increased  tendency  to  the  development  of  empyema,  or 
of  purulent  pericarditis.  The  liability  to  the  subsequent  develop- 
ment of  chronic  nephritis  has  also  to  be  remembered,  and  must 
entail  the  greatest  caution,  even  in  the  mildest  form  of  this  disease. 

Chronic  Nephritis.  Although  it  is  generally  considered  desir-. 
able  to  attempt  to  deal  with  the  cause  of  any  diseased  process,  and 
thus  to  diminish  liability  to  the  disease,  this  becomes  especially  diffi-" 
cult,  and  in  many  cases  even  impossible,  in  connection  with  chronic 
nephritis.  The  onset  of  this  disease  is  usually  gradual,  and  it  is 
only  when  it  appears  to  be  dependent  upon  such  conditions  as 
malaria,  syphilis,  or  continued  suppuration  that  it  is  possible  to 
attack  the  cause  with  any  hopefulness.  If  chronic  nephritis  is 
found  coexistent  with  chronic  suppuration,  benefit  frequently  results 
from  the  successful  treatment  of  the  suppuration,  and  when  due  to 
malaria  or  syphilis  these  conditions  necessarily  require  appropriate 
remedies.  When  the  disease  gradually  develops  after  an  attack  of 
acute  nephritis  the  early  treatment  becomes  almost  inseparably 
linked  with  that  of  acute  nephritis.  Reference  has  already  been 
made  to  the  necessity  for  dietetic  precautions  whenever  cases  of 
acute  nephritis  are  tending  to  a  chronic  course.  Although  many 
forms  of  routine  treatment  have  been  advocated  for  chronic  neph- 
ritis, there  is  little  evidence  that  they  have  produced  beneficial 
results.  The  inflammatory  process  is  not  sufficiently  active  to 
require  special  treatment,  and  although,  speaking  generally,  it  is 
necessary  to  diminish  the  work  of  the  kidney  as  far  as  possible,  to 
adopt  tonic  measures,  and  to  encourage  exercise,  yet  the  chief  indi- 
cations for  chronic  nephritis  are  to  a  large  extent  symptomatic.  In 
saying  this,  however,  it  must  be  remembered  that  it  is  impossible 
to  confine  the  benefits  of  the  remedies  employed  to  one  symptom, 


CHRONIC  NEPHRITIS.  359 

and  that  although  efforts  may  be  primarily  directed  to  the  treatment 
of  diminution  of  the  urine,  of  increased  albuminuria,  of  excessive 
dropsy,  or  various  other  symptoms,  yet  while  attacking  any  one  of 
them  individually  an  influence  is  probably  being  exerted  simulta- 
neously on  others. 

Considering  the  treatment  of  the  symptoms  in  detail,  one  which 
frequently  causes  anxiety  consists  of  diminished  urinary  excretion. 
If  this  symptom  occurs  without  dropsical  effusion  it  may  be  treated 
by  the  administration  of  large  quantities  of  liquid,  either  water  or 
milk,  although  the  latter  is  preferable,  owing  to  its  nourishing  powers. 
If,  however,  milk  causes  dyspeptic  symptoms,  or  if  there  is  much 
complaint  of  thirst,  imperial  drink  or  home-made  lemonade  may  be 
given  ;  both  are  frequently  taken  more  readily  if  made  mildly  effer- 
vescent. Even  in  the  absence  of  dropsy,  cardiac  tonics,  such  as  stro- 
phauthus,  digitalis,  caffeine,  or  theobromine,  may  do  good  by  in- 
creasing the  circulation  through  the  kidney.  Sometimes,  even  when 
there  is  no  specific  history,  potassium  iodide  may  be  of  service,  and 
it  has  been  given  in  increasing  doses  until  as  much  as  200  grains 
daily  have  been  administered.  This  remedy,  however,  is  more 
appropriately  employed  when  there  is  much  dropsical  eff'usion. 

Efforts  are  sometimes  made  to  reduce  the  amount  of  albumin 
eliminated  in  chronic  nephritis,  on  the  assumption  that  the  weak- 
ness which  is  so  prominent  in  this  disease  is  to  be  attributed  to  the 
great  loss  of  albumin.  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  albuminuria 
might  be  lessened  by  reducing  the  quantity  of  albuminous  matter 
given  in  the  diet.  It  is  generally  a  mistake  to  interfere  thus  with 
the  dietary,  and  I  feel  sure  that  if  the  strength  and  the  general 
health  improve  during  the  administration  of  nitrogenous  food,  a 
slight  increase  of  the  amount  of  albumin  eliminated  is  comparatively 
unimportant. 

On  the  other  hand,  there  may  be  distinct  indications  for  limitation 
of  the  dietary,  as,  for  example,  when  dyspeptic  symptoms  arise  or 
when  headache  is  produced  during  the  consumption  of  a  somewhat 
liberal  allowance.  It  must  be  remembered  that  the  above  remarks 
apply  only  to  those  cases  in  which  hsematuria  is  absent,  and  that 
when  any  such  indication  of  the  extension  of  the  inflammatory 
process  occurs  the  case  is  temporarily  to  be  treated  as  one  of 
acute  nephritis.  The  influence  of  alcohol  is  somewhat  open  to 
question ;  for  while  there  is  no  advantage  in  prescribing  stimulants 
in  the  majority  of  cases,  there  may  be  distinct  disadvantages  in  for- 


360  RENAL  DISEASES. 

bidding  stimulants  to  those  who  have  been  in  the  habit  of  taking 
them  in  moderation.  In  such  patients  small  quantities  of  alcohol, 
well  diluted,  and  given  only  at  meal-times,  may  promote  appetite 
and  digestion.  Broadly  speaking,  however,  stimulants  should  be 
reserved  for  patients  who  have  to  keep  in  bed  on  account  of  cardiac 
weakness.  The  amount  of  albumin  lost  may  sometimes  be  greatly 
reduced  by  keeping  the  patient  in  bed  for  a  few  days.  Some  writers, 
however,  recommend  the  administration  of  astringents,  with  a  view 
of  reducing  the  loss  of  albumin,  but  the  risk  of  interfering  with  the 
functions  of  the  stomach  must  be  kept  in  mind,  since  these  drugs 
must,  as  a  rule,  be  given  in  large  doses  before  producing  much 
result.  Lead  acetate  is  often  recommended,  more  particularly  when 
there  is  much  hsematuria,  and  astringent  preparations  of  iron  are  also 
beneficial,  though  their  hsematinic  effect  is  frequently  greater  than 
their  power  of  diminishing  loss  of  albumin.  As  in  acute  nephritis, 
ergot,  tannic  acid,  and  gallic  acid  have  also  been  employed  with 
somewhat  doubtful  results,  and  they  add  largely  to  the  risk  of  dis- 
turbing digestion. 

Dropsy  is  a  symptom  which  probably  calls  most  urgently  for  treat- 
ment in  the  majority  of  cases  of  chronic  nephritis.  During  the  early 
stages  of  the  disease  the  degree  of  effusion  can  be  influenced  by 
medicinal  remedies,  and  it  is  only  in  advanced  conditions  that  the 
amount  of  effusion  is  likely  to  cause  immediate  anxiety.  The  treat- 
ment of  dropsy  in  chronic  nephritis  is  very  similar  to  that  in  acute 
nephritis.  It  is  usual  to  employ  diaphoretics  and  hydragogue  purga- 
tives during  the  early  stages,  and  later  to  use  diuretics.  The  adoption 
of  surgical  measures  may  also  require  consideration.  The  action  of 
the  skin  may  be  favored  either  by  vapor  baths,  hot-air  baths,  hot- 
water  baths,  or  the  wet  pack,  and  the  selection  depends  largely  upon 
the  circumstances  of  the  patient,  upon  the  means  at  hand,  and  upon 
the  extent  of  the  dropsical  effusion.  Sometimes  any  of  these  meas- 
ures may  produce  a  sense  of  weakness,  together  with  headache  and 
palpitation.  These  symptoms  may  be  averted  or  diminished  by  the 
employment  of  stimulants,  or  by  the  application  of  cold  compresses 
to  the  head ;  if,  nevertheless,  they  persist,  the  baths  should  be  dis- 
continued and  other  modes  of  inducing  diaphoresis  should  be  adopted. 

One  of  the  simplest  and  easiest  ways  of  promoting  diaphoresis  con- 
sists in  placing  a  metallic  spirit-lamp  under  the  centre  of  the  chair 
upon  which  the  patient  is  seated,  enveloped  with  blankets  which 
reach  down  to  the  ground.     In  spite  of  its  simplicity,  however,  this 


CHRONIC  NEPHRITIS.  361 

method  is  somewhat  dangerous,  since  the  size  of  the  flame  may  in- 
crease suddenly,  and  it  has  also  the  disadvantage  of  being  inappli- 
cable to  patients  who  are  much  weakened  by  disease.  An  alternative 
plan  is  to  place  the  lamp  upon  a  plank  in  the  centre  of  the  bed,  and 
to  raise  the  bedclothes  by  means  of  a  surgical  cradle  ;  but  it  is  safer, 
when  possible,  to  keep  the  lamp  altogether  outside  the  bed,  and  to 
convey  the  heated  air  to  the  interior  by  long  pipes  similar  to  those 
employed  with  bronchitis-kettles.  Even  with  this  precaution,  care 
must  be  taken,  as  there  is  still  the  risk  of  causing  blistering  of  the 
limbs  if  the  pipes  are  allowed  to  come  into  contact  with  the  skin. 
This  is  peculiarly  prone  to  occur,  since  there  is  much  diminution  of 
cutaneous  sensibility,  owing  to  the  dropsical  effusion.  Upon  the 
whole,  although  it  perhaps  involves  more  trouble,  I  am  in  favor  of 
the  use  of  the  wet  pack  in  preference  to  the  vapor  bath,  and  the 
mode  of  employing  this  has  been  already  fully  described. 

The  free  action  of  the  skin  is  sometimes  favored  by  the  frequent 
administration  of  diaphoretic  drugs  as  well  as  by  the  occasional 
employment  of  hot  baths  or  wet  packs ;  it  was  once  thought  that 
pilocarpine  might  be  sufficient  to  produce  free  diaphoresis  even 
without  the  employment  of  baths.  At  the  present  time  this  drag 
is  not  very  much  used,  since  it  may  promote  dangerous  pulmonary 
oedema.  When,  however,  it  is  difficult  to  excite  the  action  of  the 
skin  by  baths  or  wet  packs,  benefit  may  sometimes  result  from  the 
employment  of  small  doses  of  pilocarpine,  which  thus  serve  as  a 
starting-point  of  diaphoresis.  Simultaneously  with  the  employment 
of  these  diaphoretic  measures,  hydragogae  purgatives  should  be  used. 
Simple  salines,  such  as  sodium  sulphate,  potassium  bitartrate,  and 
potassium  and  sodium  tartrate,  are  sometimes  beneficial  when  admin- 
istered in  concentrated  solutions  ;  but  greater  benefit  frequently 
results  from  the  use  of  jalap,  either  in  the  form  of  the  compound 
jalap  powder  of  the  Pharmacopoeia  or  with  small  quantities  of  scam- 
mony.  The  employment  of  these,  however,  should  be  limited  by 
the  presence  of  dropsical  effusion,  and  they  should  be  reduced  or 
discontinued  in  accordance  with  the  symptoms.  Diuretic  measures 
may  be  adopted  in  cases  of  chronic  type  when  the  use  of  hydra- 
gogue  purgatives  has  not  been  attended  with  much  advantage. 
Lithium  carbonate  and  potassium  citrate,  or  sodium  citrate  or  tar- 
trate, may  often  give  rise  to  an  increase  in  the  amount  of  water 
eliminated,  and  may  thus  produce  diminution  of  dropsy. 

Although  ursemic  symptoms  are  perhaps  less  usual  with  this  dis- 


362  RENAL  DISEASES. 

ease  than  with  cirrhosis  of  the  kidney,  they  occur  with  sufficient 
frequency  to  call  for  notice  here.  They  are  most  prone  to  develop 
when  there  has  been  long-continued  diminution  in  the  daily  excre- 
tion of  urine.  Hence,  they  are  generally  to  be  treated  by  diuretics, 
diaphoretics,  and  by  purgatives.  Of  the  two  forms  of  uraemia,  acute 
and  chronic,  the  latter  is  most  commonly  met  with  in  connection 
with  chronic  nephritis,  and  it  is,  happily,  the  form  which  is  most 
readily  affected  by  diaphoretic  and  diuretic  measures.  Should  there 
be  much  complaint  of  persistent  headache  or  of  sleeplessness,  various 
nitrites  may  be  used,  and  these,  as  already  described  in  connection 
with  angina  pectoris,  may  be  administered  either  by  inhalation  or 
by  the  mouth.  Nitroglycerin  is  perhaps  preferable  to  amyl  nitrite, 
as  the  effect,  though  it  is  produced  more  slowly,  is  more  lasting  ; 
recently  erythrol  tetranitrate  has  been  recommended  on  account  of 
its  power  of  causing  prolonged  reduction  of  the  blood -pressure. 
The  sleeplessness,  like  that  of  acute  nephritis,  may  be  treated  with 
bromides,  chloral,  or  with  hyoscine.  Dr.  Stephen  Mackenzie'  has 
recommended  morphine  as  a  palliative  in  cases  marked  by  ursemic 
symptoms,  and  this  treatment  has  been  indorsed  by  some  other 
observers,  although  the  use  of  morphine  or  opium  in  connection 
with  chronic  nephritis  is  usually  regarded  with  anxiety.  When 
vomiting  and  diarrhoea  occur  spontaneously  late  in  the  disease  they 
may  cause  considerable  weakness  and  may  be  very  intractable. 
Small  quantities  of  strong  beef-tea,  given  at  frequent  intervals,  may 
occasionally  reduce  the  urgency  of  the  symptoms,  but  ursemic  vom- 
iting has  often  to  be  met  by  nutrient  enemata.  Urgent  diarrhoea  is 
occasionally  to  be  controlled  by  the  repeated  employment  of  enemata 
containing  opium,  but  the  use  of  astringents  by  the  mouth  is  rarely 
attended  by  success.  Ursemic  dyspnoea  has  to  be  dealt  with  accord- 
ing to  the  light  thrown  upon  the  symptom  by  the  condition  of  the 
lungs  and  heart.  When  the  dyspnoea  is  associated  with  heart  weak- 
ness it  may  be  treated  with  digitalis,  alcohol,  ether,  or  other  forms 
of  cardiac  stimulant ;  ^^hile,  when  associated  with  much  lung  engorge- 
ment, expectorant  measures,  such  as  mixtures  containing  aromatic 
spirit  of  ammonia  and  ether,  give  better  results.  Sometimes,  how- 
ever, cases  of  dyspnoea  occur  which  appear  to  be  of  an  undoubted 
ursemic  type,  and  these  improve  with  the  use  of  diaphoretics  and 
diuretics,  rather  than  with  expectorants  or  cardiac  stimulants. 

1  Lancet,  August  10,  1889. 


CIRRHOSIS  OF  THE  KIDNEY.  363 

In  the  above  pages  attention  has  been  mainly  directed  to  those 
cases  which  are  of  sufficient  severity  to  interfere  wholly  with  the 
ordinary  occupation,  and,  indeed,  to  necessitate  the  patient  remain- 
ing in  bed.  When,  however,  patients  come  under  observation  at  an 
earlier  stage,  much  benefit  may  result  from  some  rearrangement  of 
the  habits  and  occupation.  It  is  distinctly  undesirable  to  continue 
any  occupation  involving  great  physical  strain  or  constant  worry 
and  mental  excitement,  but  it  is  also  inexpedient  to  insist  upon 
complete  separation  from  work  before  this  is  necessitated  by  the 
patient's  condition.  Those  suffering  from  chronic  nephritis  are  fre- 
quently prone  to  take  a  gloomy  view  of  life,  and  this  natural  ten- 
dency is  increased  when  they  are  forced  to  keep  in  bed ;  accordingly 
the  appetite  and  general  well-being  are  likely  to  suffer  severely  from 
premature  interference  with  the  ordinary  habits  of  exercise.  If  it 
is  possible,  the  work  undertaken  should  be  of  a  light  and  interesting 
character,  and  it  is  especially  important  that  it  should  be  arranged 
so  as  to  involve  no  undue  exposure  to  cold  and  no  short  periods  of 
overstrain.  During  the  early  stages  of  chronic  nephritis  the  chief 
risks  incurred  are  those  which  result  from  subacute  attacks  marked 
by  hsematuria.  The  frequency  with  which  such  attacks  occur  may 
to  some  extent  be  reduced  by  sheltering  the  patient  from  rapid  alter- 
nations of  temperature ;  some  benefit,  therefore,  is  likely  to  result 
from  the  use  of  woollen  garments  and  from  the  adoption  of  the 
broad  flannel  belt  over  the  loins,  similar  to  that  worn  by  Europeans 
in  tropical  climates.  When  circumstances  permit,  these  patients 
should  be  sent  to  a  warm  climate  during  the  winter  months.  San 
Diego,  Cal.,  Torquay,  Ventnor,  or  Bournemouth  may  be  recom- 
mended, though  sometimes  greater  advantage  may  be  derived  from 
a  winter  sojourn  in  Egypt  or  in  Algiers. 

Cirrhosis  of  the  Kidney.  The  treatment  of  renal  cirrhosis  to 
some  extent  resembles  that  of  chronic  nephritis,  but  this  resem- 
blance is  mainly  characteristic  of  the  later  stages  of  the  disease,  the 
earlier  conditions  frequently  necessitating  special  forms  of  treatment. 
It  is  very  rarely  possible  to  deal  directly  with  the  cause  of  the  dis- 
ease, though  when  due  to  gout,  to  lead  poisoning,  or  to  syphilis 
these  various  conditions  should  be  treated  on  general  principles,  and 
the  urgency  of  the  renal  symptoms  will  often  be  found  to  diminish 
to  some  extent,  as  the  disease  with  which  they  are  associated  yields 
to  the  treatment.  In  general,  however,  the  recognition  of  cirrhosis 
of  the  kidney  is  only  made  at  a  stage  when  the  disease  has  probably 


364  RENAL  DISEASES. 

been  already  in  existence  for  some  months  or  even  years ;  and 
although  it  is  still  necessary  to  ascertain  and  to  treat,  so  far  as  pos- 
sible, the  cause  of  the  renal  affection,  there  is  little  likelihood  that 
benefit  will  result  froai  measures  primarily  directed  against  the 
cause,  and  the  treatment  therefore  must  chiefly  be  symptomatic. 

The  most  hopeful  class  of  cases  to  deal  with  is  that  dependent 
upon  gout,  or  associated  with  alcoholic  excesses,  since  both  these 
tendencies  may  be  counteracted,  and  accordingly  the  continued  irri- 
tation of  the  kidney  may  thus  be  reduced.  In  this  particular  form 
of  Bright's  disease  it  is  very  rarely  necessary  to  consider  the  advis- 
ability of  attempting  to  reduce  the  amount  of  albuminous  loss,  since 
frequently  this  loss  is  extremely  small,  and  albumin  may  even  be 
absent  from  the  urine  for  days  or  weeks  ;  the  diagnosis  must,  there- 
fore, be  based  upon  other  associated  conditions,  such  as  changes  in 
the  vascular  system,  and  upon  the  development  of  other  indications 
of  interference  with  renal  elimination. 

The  risks  of  cirrhosis  of  the  kidney  are  undoubtedly  influenced 
by  external  conditions.  It  has  been  recommended  that  ordinary 
occupations  should  be  entirely  given  up,  this  recommendation  being 
based  on  the  hypothesis  of  the  frequent  dependence  of  this  condition 
upon  nervous  strain  and  worry.  It  is,  however,  very  rarely  advis- 
able to  attempt  to  completely  alter  the  mode  of  life  in  this  way. 
Often  such  change  is  precluded  by  the  circumstances  of  the  patient, 
but  even  among  the  more  wealthy  it  is  undesirable  to  insist  upon 
enforced  inactivity,  since  this  disease,  like  chronic  nephritis,  is  fre- 
quently characterized  by  considerable  mental  depression,  and,  there- 
fore, if  the  daily  routine  is  fairly  free  from  anxiety  and  worry,  it  is 
better  for  the  patient  to  continue  his  usual  occupation. 

In  advanced  forms  of  renal  cirrhosis,  residence  during  the  winter 
months  in  warm  or  temperate  climates  is  advisable,  since  it  not  only 
avoids  the  danger  of  exposure  to  cold  and  of  the  extension  of  the 
disease,  but  also  affords  brightness  and  interest,  free  from  the  ordi- 
nary course  of  a  busy  life.  When  expatriation  is  impossible,  it  is 
still  advisable  to  avoid  the  risks  of  chills  by  insisting  upon  warm 
clothing,  especially  upon  the  use  of  flannel  or  woollen  garments  to 
be  worn  next  the  skin. 

The  administration  of  remedies  intended  to  control  the  cirrhotic 
changes  within  the  kidney  is  often  advocated,  and  foremost  among 
these  potassium  iodide  is  to  be  mentioned.  This  is  frequently  given 
in  comparatively  large  doses  for  a  length  of  time,  and  if  the  disease 


CIRRHOSIS  OF  THE  KIDNEY.  365 

is  dependent  upon  syphilis  it  appears  to  be  somewhat  beneficial ; 
but  under  other  circumstances  there  are  distinct  disadvantages  in 
the  continued  use  of  this  remedy,  since  it  is  not  only  depressant,  but 
it  is  extremely  liable  to  cause  disorder  of  digestion  and  to  increase 
any  dyspeptic  symptoms  which  may  already  be  in  existence.  Amer- 
ican observers  sometimes  speak  highly  of  the  use  of  chloride  of  gold 
and  sodium,  which  is  official  in  the  United  States  Pharmacopoeia. 
This  is  given  in  doses  of  from  ^-^  grain  to  ^^  grain  once  or  twice  a 
day,  and  it  is  used  not  only  in  cirrhosis  of  the  kidney,  but  also  in 
cirrhosis  of  the  liver.  Compounds  of  gold,  however,  have  not  been 
received  with  much' favor  in  England,  although  they  have  been  said 
to  improve  the  character  of  the  urine,  to  diminish  the  frequency  of 
nocturnal  micturition,  and  to  increase  the  general  well-being. 

With  regard  to  the  symptomatic  treatment,  one  of  the  early  symp- 
toms to  attract  attention  is  the  increase  in  the  amount  of  urine  passed, 
which  often  leads  to  nocturnal  micturition,  of  which  complaint  may 
be  made.  Although  this  symptom  will  attract  attention,  it  is  not 
advisable  to  attempt  to  diminish  the  polyuria  ;  but,  on  the  contrary, 
it  should  be  favored,  since  attempts  to  reduce  the  daily  excretion  of 
urine  are  likely  to  entail  a  diminished  elimination  of  nitrogenous 
waste. 

The  loss  of  albumin  in  any  considerable  quantity  is  a  compara- 
tively rare  occurrence  in  cirrhosis  of  the  kidney.  In  such  cases  it 
will  be  advisable  to  limit  the  amount  of  nitrogenous  food  ;  but  any 
alteration  of  diet  must  be  made  with  great  care  and  circumspection, 
since  the  appetite  is  commonly  poor  and  capricious,  and  may  fail  if 
the  dietary  is  rendered  too  plain  and  uninteresting.  It  should  be 
remembered  that,  throughout  the  course  of  this  disease,  dyspeptic 
symptoms. are  frequent,  and  there  is  strong  reason  for  believing  that 
the  condition  may  be  favored  by  chronic  dyspepsia,  such  as  may 
result  from  deficient  mastication  ;  on  the  other  hand,  dyspeptic 
symptoms  also  occur  in  a  late  stage,  as  indications  of  uraemia,  vom- 
iting of  rebellious  character  being  frequently  a  prelude  to  the  fatal 
termination.  On  all  grounds,  therefore,  in  dealing  with  cirrhosis  of 
the  kidney,  it  is  advisable  to  diminish  the  amount  of  work  to  be 
performed  by  the  kidney,  both  by  reducing  the  amount  of  nitrog- 
enous foods  and  by  the  use  of  simple  diuretics. 

Persistent  headache  is  an  early  symptom  which  often  demands 
treatment.  This,  in  general,  appears  to  be  due  to  altered  vascular 
tension  rather  than  to  retention  of  nitrogenous  waste.     In  the  ear- 


366  RENAL  DISEASES. 

liest  stages  of  cirrhosis  of  the  kidney  the  headache  is  certainly 
mainly  due  to  the  former  condition,  though  perhaps  in  the  later 
stages  it  may  be  an  indication  of  uraemia.  Persistent  headache 
may  sometimes  be  very  markedly  relieved  by  the  use  of  mild  purga- 
tives, but  when  it  resists  the  action  of  simple  salines  it  will  be  advis- 
able to  use  other  remedies  which  reduce  the  vascular  tension,  such  as 
nitroglycerin  or  one  of  the  official  nitrites.  Nitroglycerin  is  fairly 
readily  taken,  and  may  be  used  either  in  the  tabellae  or  as  the  spirit 
of  glonoin.  Occasionally  either  of  these,  if  used  in  too  large  a  dose, 
appears  to  provoke  headache,  but  frequently  the  dose  can  be  adjusted 
so  as  to  obtain  relief. 

Erythrol  tetranitrate  has  been  used  with  the  same  object,  and  is 
credited  with  the  power  of  causing  reduction  of  the  blood-pressure 
of  a  somewhat  persistent  character.  When  the  prolonged  effect  of 
the  nitrite  is  desired,  sodium  nitrite  is  also  frequently  employed  ;  it 
may  be  given  in  doses  of  from  1  to  5  grains.  This  remedy  occa- 
sionally causes  unpleasant  symptoms,  and  hence  it  is  advisable  to 
commence  with  small  doses,  and  to  increase  the  quantity,  if  neces- 
sary, after  the  susceptibility  of  the  patient  has  been  ascertained. 

The  persistent  headache  of  renak  cirrhosis  is  often  associated  with 
insomnia,  which  will  necessitate  the  employment  of  some  hypnotic. 
The  use  of  opium  has  occasionally  given  satisfactory  results,  but  if 
the  specific  gravity  of  the  urine  is  very  low,  and  the  insomnia  is 
associated  with  headache,  there  is  some  risk  in  the  employment  of 
opium,  or  any  of  its  preparations,  and  it  is  better  to  employ  a  hyp- 
notic which  is  free  from  risks  of  interfering  with  the  renal  excre- 
tion. Hyoscyine  hydrobromate  has  given  good  results  in  this  form 
of  insomnia,  but,  as  it  occasionally  causes  symptoms  of  mild  de- 
lirium, it  is  not  perhaps  so  largely  employed  as  it  might  be. 

Of  the  other  hypnotics,  sulphonal  and  paraldehyde  can  be  recom- 
mended. In  favor  of  the  former  may  be  mentioned  the  fact  that 
after  the  habit  of  sleeplessness  has  been  overcome  by  the  use  of  a 
moderate  dose,  the  amount  of  sulphonal  administered  nightly  may 
be  reduced.  Against  sulphonal  the  chief  disadvantages  are  the 
tardiness  of  action  and  the  occasional  failure  to  produce  sleep, 
with  the  subsequent  development  of  mild  ataxic  symptoms. 

Paraldehyde  has  given  good  results  in  the  insomnia  of  renal  cir- 
rhosis, but  the  persistent  odor  is  a  strong  objection  to  its  frequent 
employment,  although  this  may  form  a  safeguard  against  the  estab- 
lishment of  a  drugr  habit. 


CIRRHOSIS  OF  THE  KIDNEY.  367 

Reference  has  already  been  made  to  the  frequency  of  dyspeptic 
symptoms  in  the  course  of  renal  cirrhosis.  These  may  be  dealt 
with  either  by  the  use  of  drugs  or  by  modifications  of  diet.  If  the 
dyspeptic  symptoms  are  of  the  ordinary  type,  and  dependent  upon 
mild  gastritis,  advantage  will  follow  the  employment  of  salts  of  bis- 
muth, or  of  sodium  bicarbonate,  which  may  be  given  in  conjunction 
with  gentian,  or  with  diluted  hydrocyanic  acid.  Frequently,  how- 
ever, especially  in  advanced  forms  of  cirrhosis,  dyspeptic  symptoms 
persist  in  spite  of  these  gastric  sedatives.  Occasionally  they  appear 
to  be  increased  by  the  use  of  any  highly  nitrogenous  form  of  dietary, 
and  it  will  then  be  desirable  to  encourage  the  sparing  use  of  meat, 
or  even  its  avoidance.  Dyspeptic  symptoms  sometimes  improve 
when  the  patient  is  put,  even  for  a  short  time,  upon  an  exclusive 
milk  diet.  Frequently,  however,  a  rigid  milk  diet  causes  loss  of 
appetite,  and  a  diet  of  carbohydrates  has  to  be  substituted.  Small 
quantities  of  fish  or  of  poultry  will  sometimes  be  beneficial,  and 
should  be  used  when  the  appetite  is  failing,  unless  they  are  found 
to  increase  discomfort  and  to  cause  vomiting. 

Vomiting  is  frequently  a  somewhat  late  symptom  of  renal  cirrhosis, 
and,  unless  dependent  upon  gastritis,  it  is  often  extremely  rebellious 
to  all  forms  of  treatment.  Occasionally  it  yields  to  the  action  of 
minim  doses  of  tincture  of  iodine,  given  every  half-hour  until  the 
vomiting  ceases  ;  while,  if  dependent  upon  gastritis,  it  may  be 
treated  with  silver  nitrate,  or  silver  oxide,  given  as  a  pill,  or  with 
creosote  or  carbolic  acid.  When  it  resists  the  action  of  these  reme- 
dies, vomiting  is  in  all  probability  a  distinct  symptom  of  ursemia, 
and  can  only  be  alleviated  by  measures  which  favor  the  elimination 
of  nitrogenous  waste,  such  as  the  use  of  vapor  baths,  of  the  wet 
pack,  and  the  frequent  administration  of  hydragogue  purgatives. 

Diarrhoea  may  sometimes  occur  in  the  early  stages  of  the  disease 
as  the  result  of  gastro-enteritis  ;  it  is  then  to  be  treated  in  the  ordi- 
nary way  with  astringents  and  sedatives.  When,  however,  it  occurs 
late,  although  these  remedies  are  sometimes  of  service,  it  often  per- 
sists in  spite  of  their  use,  and  necessitates  the  employment  of  enemata 
of  starch  and  opium  and  the  use  of  milk  diet.  Some  degree  of  loose- 
ness of  the  bowels  is,  however,  frequently  an  advantage  in  connec- 
tion with  the  late  stages  of  renal  cirrhosis ;  hence,  unless  the  diar- 
rhoea is  very  exhausting,  it  is  better  not  to  attempt  to  check  it  too 
suddenly. 

With  regard  to  the  changes  in  the  circulatory  system,  apart  from 


368  RENAL  DISEASES.. 

the  high  tension  already  mentioned,  there  are  frequently  no  indica- 
tions for  treatment  until  late  in  the  course  of  the  disease,  when, 
perhaps  as  the  result  of  exhaustion  produced  by  vomiting  or  by 
diarrhoea,  the  pulse  tension  will  fail  and  the  heart's  action  may  be- 
come weak  and  irregular.  These  symptoms  will  be  indications  for 
the  use  of  digitalis,  of  strophanthus,  and  perhaps  of  citrated  caffeine, 
and  they  will  also  be  found  to  improve  somewhat  during  the  admin- 
istration of  alcohol.  When  cardiac  irregularity  persists  in  spite  of 
these  remedies,  more  direct  sedative  measures  are  sometimes  of  ser- 
vice, such  as  the  cautious  administration  of  morphine  or  cocaine 
hypodermatically . 

Cardiac  irregularities  are  often  associated  with  recurrent  attacks 
of  dyspnoea.  This  dyspnoea  is  apparently  dependent  sometimes 
upon  degeneration  of  cardiac  muscle,  sometimes  probably  upon 
alteration  in  the  character  of  the  smaller  bronchi,  and  possibly  it 
may  also  be  an  indication  of  definite  ursemic  poisoning.  I  have 
dealt  with  these  varieties  of  dyspnoea  elsewhere  at  length.^ 

The  treatment  of  spasmodic  attacks  of  difficulty  of  breathing  will 
to  some  extent  be  dependent  upon  the  estimation  of  its  cause. 
Nitroglycerin  and  amyl  nitrite  have  sometimes  been  used,  while 
cardiac  tonics,  such  as  digitalis  and  citrated  caffeine,  give  more 
general  relief.  When  the  dyspnoea  is  dependent  upon  oedema  of 
the  lung,  or  upon  an  accumulation  of  fluid  within  the  pleural  cavity, 
appropriate  measures  must  be  adopted.  In  the  latter  case,  aspira- 
tion of  the  thorax  is  sometimes  followed  by  considerable  relief ;  but 
occasionally,  although  the  prominent  distress  of  breathing  improves 
after  aspiration,  the  paroxysmal  attacks  may  remain  and  require 
further  treatment.  Under  such  circumstances  I  have  known  pilo- 
carpine prove  of  considerable  service,  though  this  remedy  must  be 
administered  cautiously  if  there  is  much  cardiac  weakness  or  bron- 
chial catarrh. 

If,  during  the  attacks  of  ursemic  dyspnoea,  the  elimination  of 
urine  is  found  to  be  much  below  the  normal  standard,  relief  may 
follow  the  use  of  diuretin,  which  may  be  administered  either  alone 
or  in  conjunction  with  digitalis  or  strophanthus.  It  is  sometimes 
found,  however,  that  ursemic  dyspnoea  resists  most  forms  of  treat- 
ment, except  those  which  directly  favor  an  increased  elimination  of 
nitrogenous  waste,  such  as  hydragogue,  purgatives,  vapor  baths,  and 
the  wet  pack.     If  the  physical  signs  show  the  coexistence  of  bron- 

^  See  Albuminuria  and  Bright's  Disease,  p.  196  (Smith,  Elder  &  Co.,  1899). 


OIBBHOSIS  OF  THE  KIDNEY.  369 

chitic  changes,  or  indications  of  engorgement,  stimulant  expectorants 
are  indicated. 

Pericarditis  with  or  without  effusion  is  often  a  late  symptom  in 
the  course  of  renal  cirrhosis.  Though  in  some  cases  this  change 
may  be  only  discovered  as  the  result  of  repeated  examinations,  there 
may  be  sometimes  much  complaint  of  pain,  and  this  must  then  be 
relieved  either  by  the  application  of  two  or  three  leeches  over  the 
cardiac  area,  or  by  the  use  of  fomentations  or  of  poultices. 

In  view  of  the  comparative  frequency  of  cerebral  hemorrhage 
during  the  course  of  renal  cirrhosis,  neuralgic  headache  always 
attracts  considerable  attention,  since  it  is  often  regarded  as  a  fore- 
runner indicative  of  the  danger  of  hemorrhage ;  hence,  whenever 
patients  complain  of  recurrent  attacks  of  migraine  or  of  neuralgic 
pain,  either  frontal  or  occipital,  immediate  measures  must  be  taken 
for  the  relief  of  this  symptom.  Nitrites  or  nitroglycerin  may  occa- 
sionally be  beneficial ;  but  the  pain  is  frequently  more  readily  con- 
trolled by  the  use  of  antipyrin  or  antifebrin,  though,  on  account  of 
their  influence  upon  the  pulse,  these  remedies  must  be  employed  in 
moderate  doses  and  with  due  precautions.  Should  symptoms  of 
cerebral  hemorrhage  occur,  the  case  must  be  dealt  with  on  ordinary 
principles,  but  the  prognosis  is  rendered  much  more  serious  by  the 
coexistence  of  renal  changes. 

Although  cerebral  hemorrhage  is  the  most  serious  result  of  high 
tension  and  of  degenerative  changes  in  the  walls  of  the  bloodves- 
sels, many  other  forms  of  hemorrhage  may  arise.  The  retinal 
hemorrhages  are  of  diagnostic  value,  but  do  not  call  for  special 
modification  of  treatment.  Epistaxis  is,  however,  fairly  frequent, 
and  although  it  may  sometimes  be  checked  by  rest,  by  ice,  or  by 
tannic  or  gallic  acid,  it  may  occasionally  necessitate  plugging  of  the 
nares.  Plugging  the  anterior  nares  is  usually  sufficient,  as  the 
hemorrhage  mostly  comes  from  the  septum,  at  no  great  distance 
from  the  nasal  orifice ;  hence,  it  is  fairly  easy  to  compress  the  bleed- 
ing vessels.  When  the  hemorrhage  persists,  it  will  be  advisable  to 
remove  the  anterior  plug,  and  to  plug  both  the  posterior  and  ante- 
rior nares.  Gastric  and  intestinal  hemorrhages  leading  to  hsemate- 
mesis  and  melsena  occur  more  rarely,  and  are  to  be  dealt  with  on 
general  principles.  Sudden  hsematuria  may  also  result  from  rupture 
of  renal  vessels,  owing  to  high  tension  and  vascular  degeneration  ;  but 
this  symptom  is  in  general  an  indication  of  the  onset  of  a  subacute 
inflammatory  attack. 

24 


370  RENAL  DISEASES. 

Impairment  of  muscular  strength  is  not  so  great  with  renal  cir- 
rhosis as  with  chronic  nephritis ;  it  also  occurs  more  gradually.  It 
may,  however,  be  of  sufficient  importance  to  call  for  the  use  of  tonic 
remedies  and  for  modifications  of  those  ordinary  occupations  which 
involve  much  muscular  strain.  The  loss  of  power  is  most  marked 
toward  the  end  of  the  disease ;  during  the  earlier  stages  it  is  often 
scarcely  appreciable,  and  may  to  a  great  extent  be  retarded  or  coun- 
teracted by  moderate  exercise  and  by  gentle  gymnastics.  Many 
instances  have  come  under  my  notice  in  which,  by  suitable  out-door 
exercise,  and  by  regulation  of  diet  and  of  stimulants,  life  has  been  pro- 
longed for  many  years,  in  spite  of  the  constant  small  drain  of  albumin. 

As  the  disease  progresses  ursemic  symptoms  become  more  marked 
and  more  constant,  and  the  progress  may  be  interrupted  by  one  or 
more  ursemic  convulsions.  Occasionally  these  may  be  sufficiently 
severe  to  cause  death,  but  the  end  is  often  reached  through  inflam- 
mation of  some  other  mternal  organ  ;  thus  a  low  type  of  pneumonia 
may  creep  on  without  much  rise  of  temperature,  while  pleurisy 
with  effusion,  hydro  thorax,  and  dry  pleurisy  are  not  uncommon. 
Daring  ursemic  convulsions  very  little  can  be  done  to  relieve  the 
condition.  In  the  acute  attack  nitrites  and  amyl  nitrite  have  been 
recommended,  but  these  have  not,  as  a  rule,  been  found  to  be  of 
much  service,  and  they  certainly  do  not  shorten  the  comatose  con- 
dition which  follows  the  convulsive  attack. 

When  convulsive  attacks  succeed  each  other  with  great  rapidity, 
chloroform  may  be  administered  ;  but  it  must  be  given  with  consid- 
erable care,  since  the  heart  is  so  frequently  in  a  weakened  condition. 
With  a  rapid  succession  of  convulsions  the  hypodermatic  injection  of 
morphine  has  been  recommended  ;  but  although  this  drug  may 
diminish  the  severity  of  the  convulsive  seizure,  it  appears  to  influ- 
ence the  excretion  of  urine  prejudicially,  and  to  favor  the  retention 
of  toxic  materials.  It  will  generally  be  found  that  during  the  con- 
vulsions the  excretion  of  urine  is  comparatively  limited,  and  that 
a  relatively  large  proportion  of  albumin  is  present.  The  treatment, 
therefore,  has  to  be  based  upon  an  effort  to  obtain  elimination  of 
nitrogenous  waste  through  other  channels.  Even  when  there  is 
little  or  no  dropsical  effusion,  it  is  perhaps  better  to  use  hydragogue 
purgatives ;  and  croton  oil,  which  can  be  easily  given  on  account  of 
the  smallness  of  the  dose,  is  usually  selected. 

As  the  convulsions  and  coma  pass  off,  diaphoretic  measures  can  be 
adopted.     Pilocarpine  has  sometimes  been  used  in  this  stage,  and,  if 


CIRBHOSIS  OF  THE  KIDNEY.  371 

given  in  small  quantity,  it  is  a  valuable  agent  to  initiate  diaphoresis, 
which  ought  subsequently  to  be  continued  by  the  use  of  the  wet  pack 
or  of  other  diaphoretic  agents  ;  but  pilocarpine  should  rarely,  if  ever, 
be  employed  during  the  stage  of  unconsciousness,  since  it  promotes 
considerable  secretion  from  the  salivary  glands  and  from  the  bron- 
chial mucous  membrane,  and  in  an  unconscious  patient  these  secre- 
tions may  very  seriously  impede  respiration.  The  routine  employ- 
ment of  pilocarpine  in  connection  with  ursemic  convulsions  must  be 
strongly  deprecated.  Diuretics  may  be  given  when  the  urine  is  free 
from  blood. 

Professor  Ewald,  of  Berlin,  recommends  the  use  of  venesection 
both  for  the  ordinary  symptoms  of  uraemia  and  for  the  ursemic  con- 
vulsions, and  he  considers  that,  although  the  strength  of  the  patient 
may  to  some  extent  be  reduced,  the  restoration  to  consciousness  is 
favored  by  the  removal  of  toxic  material.  If  this  treatment  is 
adopted  it  will  be  well  to  inject  water  into  the  rectum,  or  into  the 
subcutaneous  tissues,  so  as  to  further  dilute  the  toxic  equivalent  of 
the  blood  and  to  replace  fluid  that  has  been  removed. 

With  regard  to  the  other  common  complications  of  the  later 
stages  of  renal  cirrhosis,  such  as  those  connected  with  the  lungs  or 
with  the  pleura,  these  may  be  dealt  with  on  general  principles. 
Hydrothorax  may  require  repeated  tapping ;  dry  pleurisy,  on 
account  of  pain,  must  be  treated  with  fomentations  or  local  ano- 
dynes ;  while  pneumonia  will  call  for  the  administration  not  only 
of  stimulant  expectorants,  but  also  of  a  fairly  liberal  allowance  of 
alcohol,  since  this  low  form  of  pneumonia  is  frequently  associated 
with  rapid  diminution  in  the  strength  of  the  pulse. 

The  dropsy  which  occasionally  complicates  the  closing  scenes  of 
renal  cirrhosis  must  often  be  regarded  as  of  cardiac  rather  than  of 
renal  origin,  and  it  necessitates  the  use  of  cardiac  stimulants  and 
diuretics,  such  as  digitalis,  caffeine,  strophanthus,  and  diuretin, 
rather  than  the  repeated  employment  of  hydragogue  purgatives. 
Occasionally  some  preparation  of  squill  may  be  added  with  advan- 
tage to  any  of  the  foregoing,  since,  with  the  supervention  of  cardiac 
dropsy,  oedema  of  the  lung  is  very  likely  to  occur ;  and  when  this 
is  the  case  the  expectorant  action  of  squill  is  of  considerable  service. 
The  success  of  the  treatment  to  a  large  extent  depends  upon  the 
recognition  of  this  cause  of  dropsy,  since  hydragogue  purgatives,  by 
their  weakening  influence,  may  greatly  reduce  the  patient's  strength 
and  promote  increased  embarrassment  of  the  circulation. 


CHAPTEE   XVI. 

NEEVOUS   DISEASES. 

Hysteria — Neurasthenia — Hystero-epilepsy — Enuresis — Chorea — Epilepsy — 
Locomotor  Ataxia — Infantile  Paralysis — Neuralgia. 

Hysteria.  Under  this  name  numerous  conditions  are  included 
which  vary  in  intensity,  from  severe  convulsions  or  the  paralysis  of 
special  sets  of  muscles  on  the  one  hand,  to  emotional  disturbances 
on  slight  provocation  on  the  other  hand ;  the  latter  being  perhaps 
constitutional,  or  the  results  of  deficient  educational  control,  rather 
than  actual  indications  of  disease. 

-  It  is  unnecessary  here  to  enter  into  a  consideration  of  the  leading 
symptoms  of  hysteria ;  indeed,  the  disease,  although  well  recognized 
among  medical  men,  is  enshrouded  in  so  much  mystery,  both  con- 
cerning its  predisposing  and  its  exciting  causes,  that  in  general  the 
term  "  hysteria  "  is  rarely  employed,  either  to  the  patient  or  to  the 
patient's  friends.  By  long  custom  the  word  has  become  somewhat 
misunderstood,  and  it  is  often  regarded  as  indicating  a  perverted 
mental  condition,  capable  of  control,  to  be  dealt  with  by  harsh  meas- 
ures, and  perhaps  by  scolding.  This  is  distinctly  unfortunate,  since 
the  adoption  of  such  a  mode  of  treatment  is  frequently  followed  by 
an  increase  in  the  severity  of  the  symptoms,  which  may  sometimes 
even  extend  over  the  border-line  which  separates  this  disease  from 
the  exaggerated  self -consciousness  and  habits  of  introspection  which 
so  often  form  the  early  indications  of  more  serious  perversion  of  the 
mental  faculties. 

In  the  treatment  of  hysteria  it  is  of  primary  importance  to  main- 
tain the  general  health  of  the  patient,  and  this  is  broadly  true  for 
all  forms  of  hysteria,  ranging  from  the  mild  manifestations  to  the 
occurrence  of  hysterical  convulsions,  or  to  the  condition  which  has 
of  late  years  been  designated  neurasthenia. 

To  promote  healthy  conditions  it  is  essential  to  make  careful  in- 
quiries as  to  the  habits  of  the  patient,  and  to  some  extent  the  indi- 
cations for  treatment  will  be  derived  from  the  history  of  the  indi- 
vidual.    Frequently  it  is  advisable  to  recommend  exercise  in  the 


HYSTERIA.  373 

open  air,  and  for  those  patients  who  find  that  they  are  unable  to 
walk,  carriage  exercise,  riding,  or  bicycling  may  be  of  considerable 
service.  It  is  important,  however,  to  remember  that  in  a  large 
number  of  cases  adequate  rest  is  almost  as  essential  as  sufficient 
exercise. 

Hysterical  conditions  are  apt  to  be  developed  among  those  who 
"  never  have  a  moment  to  themselves,"  but  who  rush  about  from 
one  occupation  to  another,  and  do  not  allow  themselves  sufficient 
time  either  for  eating  or  sleeping.  It  is  on  this  account,  therefore, 
that  it  is  imperative  to  be  fully  acquainted  with  the  patient's  habits, 
both  as  reported  by  themselves  and  also  by  their  friends,  before 
attempting  to  lay  down  any  hard-and-fast  directions.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  condition  is  frequently  found  to  arise  when  there  are  no 
definite  duties  or  occupations  to  maintain  the  interest  in  life,  and 
when,  accordingly,  nerve  energy  is  thrown  away  upon  literature  of 
an  exciting  character  or  upon  an  undue  expenditure  of  sympathy 
in  the  real  or  imaginary  sufferings  of  neighbors  and  friends.  In 
these  cases  it  is  necessary  to  devise  some  form  of  interest  and  occu- 
pation which  should  be  of  a  particularly  unexciting  character. 

Frequently  it  will  be  found  that  the  digestive  functions  demand 
treatment.  It  is  sometimes  necessary  to  encourage  a  more  rational 
form  of  dietary  in  order  to  insure  a  sufficiency  of  nourishing  food, 
while  various  irregularities,  either  of  the  functions  of  the  intestine 
or  of  the  stomach,  may  call  for  attention.  Companionship  is  almost 
always  desirable,  but  in  exaggerated  forms  of  hysteria  the  com- 
panion should,  if  possible,  be  carefully  selected,  so  as  not  to  encour- 
age introspection  by  undue  sympathy.  Very  little  advantage  results 
ordinarily  from  undue  severity  or  from  total  lack  of  sympathy,  both 
of  which  favor  the  fancy  that  the  condition  is  misunderstood,  and 
increase  the  idea  of  martyrdom,  which  it  is  so  desirable  to  avoid. 
Perhaps  the  best  companion  is  one  who  has  some  definite  work  in 
which  she  may  be  aided  by  the  patient. 

The  use  of  drugs  in  the  treatment  is  of  comparatively  small  im- 
portance as  compared  with  the  general  control  and  modification  of 
habits ;  and,  moreover,  it  is  somewhat  difficult,  in  considering  a 
disease  which  varies  so  greatly  in  intensity,  to  lay  down  any  special 
recommendations  of  drugs  which  will  be  suitable  to  the  majority  of 
cases.  To  a  great  extent  the  drugs  must  be  selected  in  accordance 
with  the  indications  afforded  by  the  individual ;  thus,  for  example, 
tonics  are  frequently  of  service,  and  occasionally,  in  addition  to  these, 


374  NEB  VO  US  DISEASES. 

laxatives  must  be  used.  The  remedies  which  are  most  commonly 
recommended  are  various  forms  of  valerian,  lobelia,  or  of  asafoetida, 
but  the  routine  administration  of  these  remedies  is  not  likely  to  be 
attended  by  much  benefit,  especially  if  the  habits  of  the  individual 
are  not  suitably  modified.  The  following  mixtures  may,  however, 
be  useful : 

R. — Tincturte  Valerianae  ammoniate        ....  ^ss. 

Spiritus  chloroformi        ......  TTL^- 

Quininffi  sulphatis  .  .  .  .         .  .  .  gr.  ij. 

Acidi  sulphuric!  diluti  ......  TTLv. 

Aquse q.  s.  ad  ,^j. 

li  . — Tincturse  lobelise     .......     TTLxv. 

Aquae  camphorge     .         .         .         .         .       q.  s.  ad     ^^j. 

As  a  rule,  it  will  be  found,  especially  in  the  more  advanced  forms 
of  neurasthenia,  that  the  consumption  of  food  has  fallen  far  below 
the  physiological  requirements  of  the  body,  and  under  such  circum- 
stances the  treatment  recommended  by  Weir  Mitchell  is  frequently 
prod-uctive  of  the  best  results.  This  includes  total  isolation  from 
friends,  and,  during  the  time  that  the  treatment  lasts,  all  communi- 
cations, even  with  relations,  should  be  forbidden. 

The  Weir  Mitchell  treatment  entails  absolute  physical  rest  during 
the  earlier  weeks,  while  the  quantity  of  food  given  is  gradually  in- 
creased, in  spite  of  protests,  and  given  in  concentrated  form.  Dur- 
ing the  earlier  period,  laxatives  are  frequently  required.  To  favor 
metabolism  and  to  increase  the  strength  of  the  wasted  muscles, 
massage  is  used  daily,  the  duration  being  gradually  increased.  It 
is  impossible  here  to  give  full  details  as  to  the  mode  of  performing 
massage — a  form  of  treatment  which  is  extreuiely  valuable,  in  spite 
of  the  many  abuses  which  have  of  late  thrown  some  discredit  upon 
its  use.  Different  forms  of  electrical  currents  are  also  commonly 
used  as  part  of  the  treatment,  the  duration  being  adapted  to  the 
patient's  power  of  endurance.  The  amount  of  improvement  that 
occasionally  follows  the  Weir  Mitchell  treatment  is  sometimes  sur- 
prising. There  is  commonly  considerable  increase  in  weight  at  the 
end  of  the  active  treatment,  and  this  increase  is  generally  maintained 
if  judicious  exercise  and  food  are  persisted  with,  after  leaving  the 
institution  where  the  treatment  has  been  carried  out.  As  a  rule, 
before  returning  home,  the  patient  is  sent  to  some  bracing  climate, 
where  the  surroundings  encourage  cheerfulness  and  exercise,  and  it 
is  usually  advisable  that  this  return  to  activity  should  be  made  under 


HYSTERIA.  375 

the  guidance  of  a  judicious,  well- trained  nurse,  rather  than  in  the 
companionsliip  of  a  relative  or  friend. 

With  regard  to  the  other  manifestations  of  hysteria,  for  instance 
when  convulsions  occur,  the  treatment  will  require  to  be  somewhat 
different.  During  the  convulsions  it  is  essential  to  clear  the  room 
of  sympathizing  onlookers,  and,  if  necessary,  to  find  some  occupa- 
tion for  each  and  all  of  them.  The  attack  of  convulsions  may 
speedily  come  to  an  end  when  the  patient  is  left  alone  with  the 
doctor  or  nurse,  but  if  the  attack  continues  it  may  be  advisable  to 
endeavor  to  check  the  fit.  The  most  rapid  method  of  attaining  this 
object  is  by  the  sudden  application  of  cold  to  the  face.  A  glass  of 
cold  water  thrown  suddenly  in  the  face  will  sometimes  prove  effec- 
tive, especially  if  the  practitioner  announces  his  intention  to  repeat 
the  treatment  if  necessary.  Should  this  fail,  a  larger  quantity  of 
water  may  be  poured  slowly  over  the  face,  but  occasionally  it  may 
be  necessary  to  resort  to  other  devices. 

In  severe  forms  of  hystero-epilepsy  the  administration  of  an  anaes- 
thetic is  sometimes  almost  the  only  measure  which  can  be  trusted  to 
cause  an  arrest  of  convulsions,  but  as  the  patient  regains  partial 
consciousness  the  convulsions  may  recommence.  Other  methods 
have  often  been  advocated,  and  of  these  perhaps  the  most  interest- 
ing is  the  application  of  pressure  over  the  ovarian  region.  This 
has  been  strongly  recommended  by  Charcot,  but  it  is  sometimes 
found  to  cause  an  increase  rather  than  an  arrest  of  the  severity  of 
the  convulsions. 

In  milder  forms  of  convulsions  the  production  of  partial  asphyxia, 
by  forcibly  closing  the  nostrils  and  the  mouth,  has  sometimes  been 
found  to  succeed ;  while  some  practitioners  recommend  the  admin- 
istration of  an  emetic,  and  if  the  patient  is  unconscious  and  unable 
to  swallow,  they  do  not  hesitate  to  inject  apomorphine  subcuta- 
neously. 

In  my  own  experience,  hysterical  convulsions  are  best  dealt  with 
by  more  simple  methods,  such  as  the  isolation  of  the  patient  in  a 
darkened  room,  and  perhaps  the  use  of  the  cold  douche.  I  have 
very  rarely  been  forced  to  use  an  anaesthetic. 

Another  form  of  hysteria  which  calls  for  special  treatment  is  that 
associated  with  paralytic  symptoms.  These  may  affect  any  physio- 
logical group  of  muscles.  Perhaps  the  most  common  form  is  that 
affecting  the  laryngeal  muscles  and  producing  aphonia.  This  con- 
dition can  frequently  be  recognized  by  the  sudden  onset  of  aphonia 


376  ^ER  VO  us  DISEASES. 

without  any  evidence  of  laryngeal  obstruction,  while  laryngoscopic 
examination  will  often  set  the  question  at  rest.  Paralysis  may, 
however,  affect  any  group  of  muscles.  The  extensors  of  one  fore- 
arm may  sometimes  be  affected,  and  the  prolonged  inaction  may 
lead  to  so  much  degeneration  of  muscular  tissue  as  to  obscure  the 
true  nature  of  the  disease.  These  forms  of  paralysis  must  necessa- 
rily be  dealt  with  according  to  the  muscles  affected.  With  hyster- 
ical aphonia  a  single  strong  electric  shock  is  usually  sufficient  to 
restore  the  voice.  This  is  ordinarily  applied  with  one  pole  on  the 
outside  of  the  larynx  and  the  other  introduced  between  the  aryte- 
noid cartilages,  the  shock  being  passed  as  soon  as  the  second  pole  is 
in  position.  This  is  more  effectual  than  the  use  of  a  continuous 
current  applied  across  the  outside  of  the  larynx,  or  even  sent 
through  the  larynx  with  one  pole  at  the  nape  of  the  neck  and  the 
other  at  the  thyroid  cartilage. 

For  the  paralysis  of  extensor  or  other  muscles  the  frequent  use 
of  a  cold  douche,  of  local  massage,  and  of  the  interrupted  current 
will  probably  suffice  to  effect  a  cure.  As,  however,  these  forms  of 
local  paralysis  are,  to  some  extent,  subject  to  the  will  of  the  patient, 
this  treatment  may  require  to  be  continued  for  a  length  of  time,  and 
may,  indeed,  fail,  unless  the  patient  is  put  into  a  nursing  home  and 
perhaps  completely  isolated. 

During  the  intervals  in  the  treatment  of  any  of  these  forms  of 
hysteria  the  use  of  valerianates,  of  asafoetida,  and  of  quinine  must 
be  continued,  though  if  used  alone  these  remedies  will  generally 
prove  of  but  little  service. 

Enuresis.  Enuresis  is  a  term  employed  to  indicate  a  condition 
which  is  frequent  among  children,  more  particularly  among  those 
who  sleep  heavily,  and  yet,  during  waking  hours,  are  of  a  nervous, 
excitable  temperament.  It  is  the  affection  commonly  termed  noc- 
turnal incontinence,  though  there  are  many  objections  to  this  term, 
the  foremost  being  that  observation  shows  that  the  bladder  quickly 
empties  itself,  as  in  the  act  of  micturition,  instead  of  permitting 
constant  outflow,  as  in  ordinary  incontinence.  Enuresis  is  the  nat- 
ural condition  of  infants  who  have  not  learned  to  control  the  action 
of  the  bladder.  The  retention  of  urine  for  some  hours  is  undoubt- 
edly an  acquired  art,  the  result  of  management  and  of  education. 
Frequently  the  lack  of  control  is  to  a  great  extent  to  be  attributed 
to  want  of  proper  care,  and  it  only  constitutes  a  condition  calling  for 
treatment  when  it  persists  after  the  age  of  two  years. 


ENURESIS.  377 

To  a  large  extent  this  persistent  difficulty  is,  then,  due  to  habit ; 
though  frequently,  when  the  condition  occurs  after  the  habit  of  con- 
trol has  been  formed,  the  starting-point  of  enuresis  is  to  be  found 
in  some  form  of  irritation,  either  in  the  urinary  passages,  such  as 
would  be  afforded  by  an  abnormally  small  orifice  or  an  unduly  long 
foreskin,  or  else  by  irritation  from  the  rectum  or  from  the  vagina, 
produced  by  worms  ;  and  in  these  children,  even  after  the  removal 
of  the  exciting  cause,  the  habit  has  still  to  be  conquered. 

The  treatment  of  the  condition  naturally  resolves  itself  into  two 
parts  :  First,  an  inquiry  into  the  nature  of  the  exciting  cause,  which, 
if  necessary,  may  be  dealt  with  by  surgical  measures  ;  and,  secondly, 
the  treatment  of  the  habit  by  medicinal  and  other  measures.  Of 
the  other  measures  the  most  hopeless  is  that  which  depends  upon 
an  erroneous  estimate  of  the  condition,  and  leads  to  scolding  and 
other  forms  of  correction  for  what,  in  reality,  is  a  form  of  physical 
weakness.  Kindly  management  is  much  more  hopeful,  and  this  is 
frequently  effected  by  reducing  the  amount  of  liquid  taken  in  the 
evening  and  by  rousing  the  child  at  intervals  to  relieve  the  bladder. 
Even  this  method  often  fails,  and  it  is  found  that  a  child  who  has 
recently  emptied  his  bladder  may,  within  an  hour  or  two,  while 
deeply  asleep,  once  more  become  deluged.  This  is  undoubtedly  due 
to  a  lack  of  balance  between  the  contractile  power  of  the  sphincter 
and  that  of  the  wall  of  the  bladder,  and  this  loss  of  control  is  most 
marked  among  children  who  sleep  heavily.  Assuming  that  sources 
of  reflex  irritation  have  been  removed,  the  treatment  must  in  these 
cases  be  purely  medicinal,  and  should  be  one  which  will  control  the 
undue  activity  of  the  expulsive  functions  of  the  bladder.  Bella- 
donna is  the  drug  which  possesses  the  greatest  power  in  this  direc- 
tion, but  opinions  differ  as  to  the  best  mode  of  employing  it,  some 
practitioners  preferring  the  tincture,  others  the  extract. 

For  many  years  in  the  out-patient  room  of  the  Evelina  Hospital 
I  carried  on  comparative  observations  on  the  use  of  this  drug,  and 
although  the  result  showed  that  in  most  cases  either  the  tincture  or 
the  extract  will  suffice  to  effect  a  cure,  I  arrived  at  the  conclusion 
that  the  extract  was  the  easier  remedy  to  employ.  My  chief  reason 
for  this  preference  is  that  to  be  effectual  the  amount  of  the  drug 
must  be  gradually  increased  until  some  influence  on  the  habit  is 
evident ;  and  to  effect  this  without  producing  marked  physiological 
symptoms,  the  quantity  of  belladonna  must  be  at  first  small,  and 
the  dose  must  be  increased  gradually  so  long  as  no  symptoms  of 


378  NER  VO  us  DISEA  SES. 

discomfort  are  produced.  It  is  obviously  somewhat  inconvenient 
in  out-patient  practice  to  supply  a  fresh  bottle  of  medicine  each 
time  that  the  dose  of  belladonna  is  to  be  increased,  and  it  is  still 
more  diflficult  to  reduce  the  amount,  if  necessary,  when  given  in 
solution.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  comparatively  easy  to  give  small 
doses  of  extract  of  belladonna  in  pill  form,  and  it  is  easy  to  vary 
the  dose  by  increasing  or  diminishing  the  number  of  pills  given. 
The  only  trouble  that  I  have  ever  encountered  in  connection  with 
the  use  of  pills  in  the  treatment  of  nocturnal  micturition  has  been 
to  persuade  the  parents  that  drugs  administered  in  the  form  of  pills 
were  not  necessarily  purgative.  As  a  rule,  children  bear  belladonna 
well ;  and  if  the  dose  is  increased  gradually,  comparatively  large 
amounts  of  the  extract  may  be  given  without  causing  dilatation  of 
the  pupils  or  dryness  of  the  throat. 

Ordinarily,  I  employ  pills  containing  ^  grain  of  the  extract,  and 
I  give  these  at  bedtime  every  night.  When  dealing  with  a  child 
of  seven  or  eight  years  old,  I  commence  with  two  of  these  pills  ; 
but  for  younger  children  one  pill  for  the  first  two  or  three  nights 
will  be  sufficient,  after  which  two  pills  may  be  taken.  At  the  end 
of  a  week,  if  no  alteration  in  the  frequency  of  nocturnal  incontinence 
has  occurred,  another  pill  is  given  every  night,  and  at  the  end  of  the 
second  week  a  fourth  pill  is  given.  During  this  week  some  change 
in  the  nightly  incontinence  is  usually  manifest,  and  the  same  dose 
is  accordingly  maintained  for  the  next  fortnight.  If,  however,  no 
improvement  and  no  toxic  symptoms  have  occurred,  the  dose  is  in- 
creased. Should  the  incontinence  cease  entirely  the  parents  must 
be  warned  not  to  check  the  administration  of  the  belladonna  sud- 
denly, since  if  this  is  done  the  whole  trouble  returns,  and  the  effec- 
tive dose  will  once  more  have  to  be  reached  by  gradual  increase. 
On  the  other  hand,  when  the  condition  appears  to  be  arrested,  the 
number  of  pills  given  at  night  should  be  gradually  decreased,  and 
any  return  of  the  trouble  should  be  regarded  as  an  indication  for 
maintaining  the  amount  of  belladonna,  or  even  for  again  increasing 
it.  If  the  tincture  is  used  it  must  be  given  in  similar  fashion  ;  but, 
as  already  indicated,  it  is  somewhat  more  troublesome  to  moderate 
or  to  increase  the  amount  administered. 

During  this  treatment  it  is  often  advisable,  though  not  always 
essential,  to  employ  tonic  measures  during  the  daytime,  such  as  the 
use  of  cod-liver  oil,  or  of  iron  and  ammonium  citrate,  or  of  chloride 
of  iron.     These  are  frequently  of  service,  since,  although  at  the  time 


CHOREA.  379 

that  the  nocturnal  micturition  occurs  the  child  is  sleeping  soundly, 
the  comfort  and  rest  are  disturbed,  and  the  health  accordingly  suf- 
fers. In  addition  to  these  remedies,  prejDarations  of  nux  vomica, 
either  the  tincture,  the  extract,  or  a  solution  of  strychnine,  may  be 
used,  especially  if  the  appetite  has  been  failing.  Since  this  condi- 
tion is  most  frequent  among  children  of  nervous  temperament,  the 
use  of  bromides  is  occasionally  advocated.  It  should  be  remem- 
bered, however,  that  the  indications  of  nervousness  may,  to  a  great 
extent,  result  from  the  so-called  moral  treatment  to  which  the  child 
has  already  been  submitted  ;  and  bromides  are  certainly  not  required 
at  night  to  assist  sleep,  since  the  little  sufferers  almost  invariably 
sleep  very  heavily  indeed  the  first  hours  of  the  night. 

When  the  urine  is  found  to  be  highly  acid,  alkaline  remedies  will 
occasionally  serve  to  reduce  its  irritating  character,  and  accordingly 
small  doses  of  solution  of  potash  or  of  sodium  bicarbonate  may  be 
given  to  render  the  urine  either  neutral  or  less  acid.  It  is  rarely 
advisable  to  increase  the  amount  sufficiently  to  cause  distinct  alka- 
linity of  the  urine. 

In  these  days  it  is  scarcely  necessary  to  add  that  the  blistering  of 
the  sacrum,  or  other  measures  to  prevent  the  child  from  sleeping  on 
the  back,  are  not  to  be  recommended.  The  incontinence  appears  to 
be  quite  independent  of  the  position  in  the  bed. 

Chorea.  The  treatment  of  chorea  will  depend  upon  the  type  of 
the  disease,  and  also  to  a  great  extent  upon  the  age  of  the  patient 
and  the  conditions  under  which  the  disease  has  arisen.  It  is  most 
frequent  in  children,  and  it  most  commonly  appears  in  nervous,  ex- 
citable children  who  are  over-anxious  with  school  work.  It  may 
also  develop  in  women  of  the  same  type,  particularly  during  preg- 
nancy. 

The  connection  of  the  disease  with  acute  rheumatism  has  long 
been  maintained ;  chorea  in  childhood  is  regarded  by  many  physi- 
cians as  one  of  the  manifestations  of  an  attack  of  acute  rheumatism, 
though  by  others  it  is  regarded  as  a  sequel,  or  as  the  individual 
expression  of  a  rheumatic  diathesis  in  a  member  of  a  distinctly 
rheumatic  family.  Frequently  some  definite  nervous  excitement 
or  shock  may  be  found  to  precede  the  onset  of  the  symptoms,  and 
inquiry  should  always  be  made  for  such  a  starting-point,  since  there 
is  some  probability  that  after  a  fright  the  sleep  may  be  disturbed  by 
nightmares,  and  such  an  occurrence  affords  a  valuable  indication  for 
treatment. 


380  NERVOUS  DISEASES. 

The  disease  assumes  three  principal  types  :  (1)  The  mild  type,  in 
which  the  raovements  show  some  slight  inco-ordination,  and  the 
child  appears  to  be  careless  rather  than  ill ;  (2)  the  severe  type,  in 
which  the  choreic  movements  are  more  wide-spread  and  violent ;  (3) 
the  maniacal  type,  in  which,  in  addition  to  violent  movements,  there 
may  be  acute  delirium.  This  last  form  is  of  comparatively  uncom- 
mon occurrence  in  children,  though  it  is  frequent  in  adults,  especially 
during  pregnancy.  With  this  form  there  is  often  considerable  con- 
stitutional disturbance,  the  temperature  rising  sometimes  to  104°  or 
105°.  When  the  disease  assumes  this  severe  type  the  ensuing  ex- 
haustion is  extreme  and  may  lead  to  a  fatal  termination.  I  have 
seen  several  instances,  however,  of  the  maniacal  type  of  chorea  de- 
velop in  children  during  attacks  of  acute  rheumatism  with  pericar- 
ditis and  endocarditis,  but  in  my  experience  these  severe  symptoms 
have  not  always  foreboded  a  fatal  termination. 

From  the  above  brief  account  of  the  chief  types  of  the  disease 
it  is  obvious  that  energetic  treatment  must  commonly  be  adopted, 
though  in  the  great  majority  of  cases  the  disease  appears  to  termi- 
nate naturally  toward  the  eighth  or  tenth  week.  The  primary  indi- 
cation is  to  be  found  in  the  maintenance  of  rest  and  in  the  avoidance 
of  all  forms  of  nerve  strain  and  excitement ;  hence,  whenever  a 
patient  is  brought  under  treatment  soon  after  the  commencement  of 
the  disease,  when  possibly  only  the  hands  and  the  arms  are  affected, 
it  is  well  to  insure  complete  rest,  without  waiting  for  the  extension 
of  the  disease  to  the  face  and  to  the  lower  extremities.  Whenever 
possible,  it  is  better  to  place  the  patient  entirely  in  the  hands  of 
nurses  to  the  exclusion  of  members  of  the  family,  since  experience 
shows  how  frequently  comparative  isolation  in  a  hospital  ward  is 
followed  within  a  day  or  two  by  very  marked  improvement,  even 
in  the  absence  of  definite  medicinal  treatment.  This  improvement 
is  in  part  due  to  the  hygienic  surroundings ;  but  the  value  of  con- 
trol, with  the  absence  of  noisy  sympathy,  cannot  be  ignored. 

Even  in  the  mildest  cases  of  chorea  the  child  should  be  removed 
from  school  and  from  all  excitement  of  lessons  and  competition ;  it 
is  also  desirable  to  employ  purgative  remedies  from  time  to  time, 
since  constipation  is  often  present  and  causes  diminution  of  appetite. 
Further,  since  chorea  is  most  frequent  among  children  of  a  somewhat 
weak  constitution,  benefit  is  usually  to  be  obtained  from  the  admin- 
istration of  cod-liver  oil  and  of  non-astringent  forms  of  iron,  which 
should  be  given  in  repeated  doses  so  long  as  any  weakness  continues. 


CHOREA.  381 

In  the  more  severe  forms  of  chorea  it  is  customary  to  employ 
arsenic,  and  it  has  been  recommended  that  the  dose  should  be  in- 
creased to  the  limit  of  toleration.  Since  children  bear  this  drug 
well;  the  treatment  may  commence  with  the  administration  of  5 
drops  of  liquor  potassii  arsenitis,  the  amount  being  increased  rap- 
idly after  the  first  two  or  three  days.  Many  observers  lay  great 
stress  upon  the  employment  of  massive  doses  of  liquor  potassii  arsen- 
itis,  and  both  Osier  and  Whitla  speak  of  the  use  of  25  drops  three 
times  a  day.  I  have  never  employed  doses  as  large  as  this,  and  I 
do  not  consider  that  they  are  devoid  of  risk,  since  numerous  cases 
of  arsenical  neuritis  have  now  been  collected  as  the  result  of  inju- 
diciously large  doses.  My  practice  has  been  to  increase  the  dose  up 
to  12  or  15  minims,  and  simultaneously  to  employ  every  night  some 
form  of  sedative  remedy,  such  as  chloral,  to  insure  quiet  sleep.  The 
use  of  chloral  on  two  or  three  successive  nights  has  afforded  the 
greatest  satisfaction  when  chorea  appeared  to  have  originated  in 
some  definite  fright,  and  I  have  no  doubt  that  owing  to  this  remedy 
I  have  been  enabled  to  employ  smaller  doses  of  liquor  potassii  arsen- 
itis. 

For  the  more  severe  cases  treated  in  hospitals  it  is  well  to  sur- 
round the  bed  with  a  screen  for  a  few  days,  so  that  the  child  may 
not  be  disturbed  by  the  attention  and  mimicry  of  others  in  the  ward. 

Since  the  employment  of  liquor  potassii  arsenitis  for  out-patients, 
or  for  children  in  a  poor  position  treated  at  home,  involves  certain 
risks,  efforts  have  frequently  been  made  to  replace  this  drug  by  some 
safer  remedy.  For  many  years  in  out-patient  practice  I  employed 
zinc  sulphate,  in  doses  of  2  to  4  grains  three  times  a  day,  commencing 
with  small  doses  and  increasing  with  the  establishment  of  toleration  ; 
but,  upon  the  whole,  it  appeared  that  the  results  were  not  much 
better  than  those  which  were  obtainable  from  the  use  of  citrate  of 
iron  and  ammonium  with  cod-liver  oil. 

There  is  considerable  evidence,  however,  in  support  of  the  value 
of  zinc  valerianate  in  adult  patients  suffering  from  chorea,  especially 
if  complicated  with  hysterical  symptoms.  Zinc  valerianate  can  be 
employed  in  doses  of  from  1  to  3  grains,  and  it  is  most  conveniently 
administered  with  mixtures  containing  chloride  of  iron.  lu  all 
probability  the  benefits  obtainable  with  this  drug  are  the  result  of 
its  action  both  on  the  nervous  and  on  the  circulatory  system. 

Advocates  have  been  found  for  the  employment  of  silver  nitrate, 
or  of  potassium  bromide,  which  may  perhaps  be  mentioned  together. 


382  NEB  VO  US  DISEASES. 

as  they  are  also  often  used  as  alternative  remedies  for  epileptic 
seizures.  These  two  drugs,  however,  differ  in  action,  the  former 
being  a  tonic  to  the  nervous  system,  while  the  latter  depresses  the 
reflex  excitability.  I  must  confess  that  I  have  been  somewhat  dis- 
appointed with  the  results  of  treatment  with  potassium  bromide. 
It  certainly  checks  the  violence  of  the  movements,  but  it  does  not 
appear  to  curtail  the  course  of  the  disease. 

Belladonna  is  another  remedy  that  has  been  highly  vaunted,  and 
its  action  resembles  that  of  potassium  bromide.  I  have  already 
mentioned  the  value  of  chloral  hydrate  when  employed  in  hypnotic 
doses  when  sleep  appears  to  be  disturbed  by  dreams,  or  when  the 
case  has  originated  in  fright.  This  drug  is,  however,  sometimes 
given  in  smaller  doses  throughout  the  day ;  but  although  the  move- 
ments become  less  violent,  it  does  not,  when  employed  in  this  way, 
appear  to  influence  the  duration  of  the  disease. 

Cimicif  uga  has  been  recommended,  mainly  by  American  observers, 
as  being  almost  the  best  remedy  for  chorea,  especially  when  the  dis- 
ease is  dependent  upon  uterine  trouble  of  rheumatic  taint.  This 
drug,  however,  has  not  been  much  employed  in  England.  It  must 
be  admitted  that  the  wide  range  of  diseases  for  which  it  has  been 
recommended,  and  the  uncertainty  of  its  physiological  action,  do 
not  inspire  much  confidence. 

In  mild  cases  of  chorea  as  well  as  in  those  of  more  severe  type, 
massage  is  frequently  of  considerable  service,  the  nutrition  improv- 
ing during  its  employment,  while  the  muscles  regain  tone. 

For  the  most  severe  forms  of  chorea — those  associated  with 
maniacal  symptoms  — it  is  essential  that  some  protection  should  be 
afforded  to  prevent  injury  during  the  violent  movements.  In  chil- 
dren this  object  may  be  attained  by  padding  the  sides  of  the  bed 
and  restraining  movement  by  sheets  passed  over  the  body  and 
held  in  position  with  sandbags ;  but  it  is  sometimes  even  necessary 
to  fasten  the  limbs  to  the  sides  by  means  of  strips  of  bandage  passed 
across  the  body  and  tied  below  the  bed. 

These  limitations  of  movement,  though  frequently  essential,  are 
merely  protectives,  and  at  the  same  time  benefit  may  usually  be 
gained  from  fairly  large  doses  of  chloral  hydrate,  or,  when  dealing 
with  adults,  of  some  form  of  morphine.  In  these  maniacal  cases 
tepid  sponging  may  also  be  every  beneficial,  more  particularly  when 
there  is  some  rise  of  temperature ;  and  if  these  measures  fail,  still 
further  soothing  influence  may  result  from  the  use  of  the  wet  pack, 


EPILEPSY.  383 

provided  that  indications  of  grave  cardiac  lesions  are  absent.  The 
danger  in  the  maniacal  form  of  chorea  is  twofold,  depending  partly 
on  hyperpyrexia,  partly  on  exhaustion.  Hence,  the  treatment  must 
be  directed  toward  the  reduction  of  fever  whenever  the  tempera- 
ture is  raised,  as  well  as  toward  the  arrest  of  movements,  so  as  to 
facilitate  the  administration  of  food. 

With  adults  it  is  sometimes  necessary  to  employ  chloroform  vapor 
to  insure  rest,  but  this  obviously  is  only  a  temporary  measure,  and 
must  be  followed  by  the  administration  of  some  other  sedative.  If 
there  are  any  contraindications  to  the  use  of  morphine,  hyoscine 
and  hyoscy amine  may  be  injected  subcutaneously  to  produce  sleep  ; 
while  in  less  exaggerated  forms  of  the  disease,  preparations  of  bella- 
donna occasionally  serve  to  quiet  restlessness.  Among  other  reme- 
dies that  have  been  employed  in  the  treatment  of  all  types  of  chorea 
may  be  mentioned  antipyrine  and  antifebrine.  The  evidence  of  their 
value  is  somewhat  conflicting.  My  own  experience  is  that,  even 
when  given  in  doses  suihcient  to  produce  cutaneous  rashes,  these 
drugs  have  not  appeared  to  influence  the  severity  of  the  attack  or 
its  duration. 

During  convalescence  change  of  air,  as  well  as  the  use  of  tonic 
remedies,  is  of  frequent  service,  and  m  children  a  mild  course  of 
gymnastic  exercises  will  often  serve  to  develop  greater  precision  of 
movement  and  more  power  of  control. 

It  should,  perhaps,  be  mentioned  that  the  cardiac  murmurs  which 
are  so  frequently  heard  during  the  height  of  an  attack  of  chorea  do 
not  call  for  the  employment  of  any  of  the  so-called  cardiac  tonics. 
In  a  large  proportion  of  cases  these  murmurs  appear  to  be  func- 
tional, and  they  disappear  during  convalescence ;  and,  on  the  other 
hand,  even  when  they  are  evidently  the  result  of  endocarditis,  either 
recent  or  developed  during  the  course  of  the  attack,  they  do  not 
necessitate  modifications  of  treatment,  provided  that  the  patient  is 
already  being  kept  absolutely  at  rest. 

In  conclusion,  it  may  be  well  to  warn  patients  and  their  friends 
of  the  risks  of  recurrence  of  chorea  under  conditions  of  excitement, 
or  as  the  result  of  exposure,  or  of  the  further  development  of  the 
rheumatic  taint. 

Epilepsy.  This  disease  is  marked  by  the  occurrence  of  attacks 
of  unconsciousness  of  short  duration,  which  are  sometimes,  but  not 
invariably,  accompanied  by  convulsions.  The  chief  characteristic 
of  the  epileptic  seizure  is  the  short  duration,  which  renders  most 


384  NERVOUS  DISEASES. 

attempts  to  treat  the  patient  during  the  attack  absolutely  futile. 
The  attacks  commonly  occur  with  very  short  warning,  and  the 
utmost  that  can  be  done  is  to  adopt  measures  to  protect  from  injury 
during  the  convulsive  seizure.  With  the  onset  of  the  epileptic 
seizure  the  patient  should  be  placed  upon  the  floor,  or  in  a  hori- 
zontal position  on  a  bed  or  couch,  provided  that  assistance  is  at 
hand  to  prevent  him  from  falling  during  the  irregular  spasmodic 
movements.  If  available,  a  piece  of  cork  or  of  hard  india-rubber 
should  at  once  be  placed  between  the  teeth,  so  as  to  diminish  the 
risks  of  injury  to  the  tongue  during  the  fit.  In  some  published 
instances  the  handle  of  a  spoon  is  said  to  be  sometimes  used  with 
the  same  object,  but  this  may  serve  to  loosen  or  even  break  the  teeth. 
A  piece  of  soft  wood  might  be  substituted,  but  in  a  large  number 
of  cases  the  tongue  is  injured  quite  at  the  commencement  of  the 
attack,  and  any  precautionary  measure  is,  therefore,  of  little  service. 

When  the  fits  succeed  each  other  with  great  rapidity  and  the 
patient  is  in  a  hospital,  amyl  nitrite  may  be  administered  by  inhala- 
tion ;  but  in  general,  even  in  hospitals,  the  fit  is  often  over  before 
it  is  possible  to  employ  this  remedy,  and,  therefore,  it  is  scarcely 
necessary  to  consider  any  treatment  except  that  to  be  adopted  with 
the  view  of  reducing  the  frequency  of  the  fits. 

Occasionally  careful  inquiry  will  demonstrate  some  probable  reflex 
cause  of  irritation  which  is  capable  of  correction.  These  epileptic 
seizures  may  commence  during  dentition,  or  in  older  children  they 
may  occur  from  reflex  intestinal  irritation  due  to  entozoa,  and  the 
discovery  of  this  condition  will  naturally  lead  to  the  adoption  of  the 
appropriate  measures.  More  rarely  the  fits  appear  to  be  connected 
with  the  irritation  due  to  an  adherent  prepuce,  while  some  cases  of 
reflex  irritation  from  foreign  bodies  in  the  external  auditory  meatus, 
or  from  accumulations  of  cerumen,  have  been  described.  In  other 
instances,  again,  the  epileptic  seizures  can  be  traced  to  some  injury, 
as,  for  example,  some  fall  or  blow  upon  the  head,  which  may  have 
fractured  the  inner  table  of  the  skull,  and  thus  caused  cortical  irri- 
tation. In  the  large  proportion  of  cases,  however,  no  definite  reflex 
cause  can  be  traced,  and  the  range  of  possible  treatment  is  thus  con- 
siderably limited. 

In  the  milder  forms  of  epilepsy — those  unassociated  with  con- 
vulsive seizures — the  fit  frequently  occurs  during  sleep,  and  thus 
may  escape  observation  until  in  all  probability  the  epileptic  condi- 
tion has  lasted  for  a  great  length  of  time.     After  the  occurrence  of 


EPILEPSY.  385 

one  definite  epileptic  seizure,  these  nocturnal  fits  may  be  suspected 
when,  on  first  rising,  the  mental  condition  is  somewhat  obscured 
and  the  individual  is  somewhat  drowsy  throughout  the  day.  On 
account  of  the  frequency  of  nocturnal  fits  in  this  disease  the  dietary 
requires  attention ;  heavy  suppers  or  indigestible  articles  late  in  the 
day  should  be  avoided,  since  if  digestion  is  not  complete  at  bedtime 
the  food  may  serve  as  a  source  of  reflex  irritation.  Even  with 
more  marked  forms  of  epilepsy  it  is  advisable  to  encourage  the  use 
of  a  light,  moderate,  and  easily  digested  form  of  diet,  and  to  lay 
stress  upon  the  importance  of  regularity  of  meals  as  well  as  of  life 
and  occupation.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  epileptic  tendency  is  to 
a  large  extent  influenced  by  business  worries  or  other  forms  of  men- 
tal excitement. 

The  medicinal  treatment  is  usually  only  palliative.  It  is  ex- 
tremely rare  for  an  epileptic  to  be  entirely  cured  by  any  treatment, 
unless  perhaps  the  cause  of  irritation  can  be  removed  by  some  sur- 
gical measure ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  with  the  continuous  use  of 
different  bromides  the  frequency  of  the  epileptic  seizures  can  be 
greatly  reduced,  and  enormous  quantities  of  bromide  may  be  toler- 
ated, and  may  even  be  required  to  keep  the  disease  in  check.  Of 
the  three  principal  bromides  employed  in  medicine — sodium  bro- 
mide, potassium  bromide,  and  ammonium  bromide — the  potassium 
bromide  is  perhaps  the  most  largely  employed,  though  of  recent 
years  there  has  been  a  great  tendency  to  discontinue  this  drug  in 
favor  of  the  others. 

Potassium  bromide  is  often  credited  with  the  power  of  producing 
intense  depression,  both  of  the  circulatory  and  of  the  nervous  sys- 
tem, this  depression  being  ascribed  mainly  to  the  potassium,  and  it 
has  been  asserted  that  ammonium  bromide  is  free  from  this  objec- 
tion, being  indeed  stimulant  rather  than  depressant ;  while  sodium 
bromide  is  neither  stimulant  nor  depressant,  and  may,  therefore, 
be  employed  without  reference  to  any  deleterious  action  upon  the 
circulatory  or  the  nervous  system.  I  have  for  many  years  endeav- 
ored to  test  the  truth  of  these  supposed  distinctions  of  action,  and 
my  experience  has  convinced  me  that  after  the  prolonged  use  of 
any  one  of  these  remedies  there  may  be  some  advantage  in  change 
to  any  other ;  thus,  even  after  ammonium  bromide  has  been  em- 
ployed for  some  months  with  a  certain  degree  of  benefit,  still  greater 
benefit  will  appear  to  follow  the  use  of  either  sodium  or  potassium 
bromide. 

25 


386  NEB  VOUS  DISEASES. 

I  have  also  employed  various  combinations  of  these  three  drugs, 
and  the  conclusion  that  I  have  arrived  at  is  that  to  some  extent  the 
benefit  of  change  of  medicine  depends  not  so  much  upon  the  drug 
employed  as  upon  its  moral  effect.  In  all  probability,  after  taking 
any  of  these  drugs  for  weeks,  or  months,  a  change  of  medicine  will 
at  any  rate  introduce  the  element  of  hope. 

In  the  treatment  of  epilepsy  with  bromides,  the  dose  should  be 
increased  until  mild  symptoms  of  bromism  arise.  Ten  to  30  grains 
of  any  one  of  the  bromides  may  be  administered  three  times  daily, 
and,  with  toleration,  these  quantities  may  often  be  greatly  exceeded. 
Although  bromides  are  commonly  administered  with  syrup  of  orange 
or  of  lemon,  the  unpleasant  taste  is  scarcely  concealed  by  the  syrup, 
and  patients  frequently  prefer  to  be  supplied  with  powders  contain- 
ing the  prescribed  dose,  and  to  dissolve  the  powder  in  some  effer- 
vescent water,  such  as  soda  water,  or  even  perhaps  in  milk,  when 
the  saline  taste  is  by  no  means  unpleasant. 

In  the  course  of  treatment  of  severe  cases  of  epilepsy  it  is  often 
imperative  to  continue  the  use  of  bromides  almost  indefinitely,  since 
whenever  their  administration  is  checked  the  seizures  become  more 
frequent.  Even  when  the  disease  appears  to  have  been  cured,  and 
when  long  periods  elapse  without  the  recurrence  of  fits,  the  bromide 
should  still  be  administered  for  a  year  or  more  after  the  date  of  the 
last  fit. 

Numerous  other  remedies  have  been  recommended  for  this  dis- 
ease, and  the  best  is  perhaps  one  of  the  compounds  of  zinc,  prefer- 
ence being  generally  given  to  the  sulphate  or  the  acetate.  In  the 
United  States  Pharmacopoeia  zinc  bromide  occurs,  and  this  has  been 
employed  in  doses  of  from  1  to  25  grains ;  but  Sir  William  Gowers 
states  that  it  appears  to  be  of  little  value  and  to  be  badly  borne. 
The  dose  commonly  recommended  is  from  J  to  2  grains. 

In  the  form  of  nocturnal  epilepsy,  chloral  hydrate  has  been  em- 
ployed in  hypnotic  doses  at  night-time  ;  in  other  cases  smaller  doses 
may  be  repeated  during  the  day.  This  drug  does  not,  however, 
appear  to  be  possessed  of  any  curative  properties  for  this  disease, 
though  it  may  perhaps  moderate  the  violence  of  the  paroxysms. 
Nitroglycerin  has  also  been  recommended  on  theoretical  grounds, 
but  the  reports  of  its  action  in  epilepsy  afford  little  encourage- 
ment. It  may,  however,  be  tried  during  intervals,  when  it  has  been 
deemed  desirable  to  check  the  administration  of  bromides  for  a 
time.     Cannabis  indica  is  credited  with  having  been  of  some  ser- 


LOCOMOTOR  ATAXIA.  387 

vice,  but  this  drug  frequently  varies  in  strength  to  such  an  extent 
as  to  render  its  employment  for  epilepsy  somewhat  dangerous. 

When  an  epileptic  seizure  is  preceded  by  a  definite  aura  proceed- 
ing from  one  or  other  of  the  extremities,  the  fit  may  be  occasionally 
averted  by  the  forcible  application  of  a  ligature  above  the  site  of 
abnormal  sensation,  and  in  these  cases  benefit  sometimes  appears  to 
ensue  from  the  application  of  blisters  along  the  course  of  the  nerves 
through  which  the  aura  proceeds.  In  a  very  large  proportion  of 
cases  of  epilepsy,  however,  these  warning  sensations  are  absent,  or 
are  so  rapidly  followed  by  the  seizure  that  there  is  no  time  for  the 
adoption  of  any  local  measures,  and  the  utmost  that  the  epileptic 
patient  can  do  is  to  place  himself  in  some  position  of  safety  with 
the  first  warning  of  the  attack. 

Reference  has  already  been  made  to  the  surgical  treatment  of 
epilepsy  and  to  the  occasional  cures  which  have  ensued  after  the 
removal  of  a  depressed  portion  of  the  skull  which  had  been  irri- 
tating the  cortex  of  the  brain.  Independently,  however,  of  histo- 
ries of  injury,  when  the  aura  has  been  found  always  to  be  referred 
to  the  same  site,  attempts  have  been  made  to  relieve  epilepsy  by  the 
removal  of  the  nerve  centre.  The  propriety  of  this  operation  is, 
however,  somewhat  doubtful,  and  the  possible  prospects  of  relief, 
together  with  the  dangers  incurred,  should  be  discussed  in  every 
case  as  it  arises. 

Locomotor  Ataxia.  The  presence  of  a  definite  lesion  in  this 
disease  and  the  common  absence  of  any  certain  indication  of  the 
origin,  render  treatment  somewhat  hopeless.  The  lesion,  which 
affects  the  posterior  columns  of  the  spinal  cord,  is  not  directly 
amenable  to  treatment,  although  in  some  rare  instances  the  progress 
of  the  disease  has  appeared  to  be  retarded  by  the  measures  adopted. 
The  most  hopeful  cases  are  those  in  which  there  is  a  distinct  history 
of  syphilis  ;  and  since  such  a  history  can  be  obtained  in  a  fairly 
large  proportion  of  cases,  antisyphilitic  treatment  should  be  adopted 
whenever  the  patient  comes  under  observation  at  a  fairly  early  stage. 
With  more  chronic  cases  the  treatment  has  to  be  directed  mainly  to 
the  relief  of  the  more  prominent  symptoms,  and  of  these  the  chief  are 
the  lightning  pains  and  the  so-called  gastric  crises. 

Observation  has  shown  that  both  mental  and  bodily  fatigue  are 
capable  of  exerting  a  prejudicial  influence  upon  those  who  are  suf- 
fering from  locomotor  ataxia,  and  accordingly,  with  the  view  of 
retarding  the  progress  of  this  disease,  all  occupations  or  conditions 


388  NEB  VO  us  DISEASES. 

which  promote  bodily  and  mental  strain  should  be  altered.  In  a 
fairly  large  number  of  those  affected,  however,  the  intellect  remains 
clear,  and,  provided  that  the  occupation  can  be  pursued  without 
overstrain  and  worry,  it  is  better  not  to  encourage  a  life  of  total 
inactivity.  All  forms  of  excess  should  be  avoided,  and  the  neces- 
sity of  leading  a  quiet,  equable  life  should  be  impressed  upon  the 
patient. 

It  is  sometimes  found  that  the  disease  appears  to  be  retarded  by 
a  short  course  at  a  hydropathic  establisliment ;  but  there  is  little 
reason  to  doubt  that  it  is  the  regularity  of  life  there  that  contributes 
very  largely  to  the  success  of  the  treatment. 

Of  the  curative  agents  that  have  been  recommended  silver  nitrate 
is  perhaps  the  one  which  has  been  most  largely  employed.  This 
may  be  given  in  comparatively  large  doses  for  a  great  length  of 
time  ;  but  there  are  two  great  objections  to  its  continued  employ- 
ment— the  development  of  a  bluish  tint  in  the  skin  and  the  probable 
supervention  of  symptoms  of  gastric  irritation.  To  avoid  the  latter 
discomfort  the  oxide  is  sometimes  used  ;  the  former  symptoms,  how- 
ever, is  not  influenced  by  this  change,  as  it  appears  to  be  dependent 
upon  the  total  quantity  of  silver  that  has  been  used  medicinally, 
although  the  amount  of  the  doses  employed  at  any  given  time  has 
very  little  influence.  Hence,  with  the  slightest  tingeing  of  the  skin 
both  the  nitrate  and  the  oxide  must  be  discontinued. 

Extract  of  physostigma,  in  doses  of  |-  to  ^  grain,  has  been  given 
in  this  as  in  many  other  spinal  affections.  I  have  known  it  to  be 
employed  over  several  years ;  but,  although  it  serves  to  satisfy  the 
craving  for  treatment,  I  am  afraid  that  it  has  not  done  much,  so  far 
as  my  observation  goes,  in  the  way  of  retardation,  still  less  of  cure. 

Arsenic  has  also  been  employed,  with  the  view  of  obtaining  its 
alterative  and  nervine  tonic  effects ;  while  ergot  and  chloride  of 
gold  have  also,  at  various  times,  been  strongly  recommended. 

As  already  indicated,  the  most  hopeful  treatment  at  the  commence- 
ment of  the  disease  consists  in  the  administration  of  corrosive  mer- 
curic chloride  and  potassium  iodide — the  former,  if  there  appears  to 
be  some  probability  that  the  patient  has  suffered  from  syphilis,  and 
has  been  insufficiently  treated ;  the  latter,  if  he  has  already  exhib- 
ited symptoms  of  tertiary  syphilis.  In  cases  of  doubt  the  two  are 
frequently  used  in  combination,  -^^  grain  of  corrosive  mercuric 
chloride  being  given  with  from  10  to  15  grains  of  potassium  iodide. 
The  amount  of  iodide  may,  however,  be  increased  when  it  is  admin- 


I 


LOCOMOTOR  ATAXIA.  389 

istered  alone,  but  it  is  desirable  to  watch  carefully  for  signs  of  iodism 
or  for  any  interference  with  the  appetite  or  digestive  power,  since 
these  symptoms  may  frequently  follow  during  the  administration  of 
large  doses  of  potassium  iodide. 

Not  many  years  ago  attempts  were  made  to  influence  the  changes 
in  the  spinal  cord  by  the  "treatment  by  suspension,"  and  the 
accounts  of  the  results  obtained  were  so  laudatory  that  for  a  length 
of  time  most  patients  with  locomotor  ataxia  were  treated  on  this 
principle.  The  rationale  of  the  treatment  was  explained  as  depend- 
ing upon  extension  or  elongation  of  the  spinal  canal,  owing  possibly 
to  some  increased  stretching  of  the  intervertebral  substance,  and 
owing,  also,  to  a  resulting  straightening-out  of  the  normal  spinal 
curves,  which  caused  an  appreciable  increase  in  the  length  of  the 
spinal  canal.  This  treatment  is  now  comparatively  rarely  employed, 
and  in  spite  of  the  advantages  which  have  been  claimed  for  it,  it 
appears  possible  that  the  benefits  attributed  to  its  use  might  perhaps 
be  referred  either  to  a  cessation  of  the  severity  of  the  pains  and 
other  prominent  symptoms,  which  might  have  occurred  with  or 
without  the  treatment,  or  else  to  the  results  of  a  psychical  influence, 
akin  perhaps  to  that  of  suggestion  during  hypnotism. 

Turning  next  to  the  treatment  of  special  symptoms  occurring  in 
the  course  of  this  disease,  the  lightning  pains  which  arise  at  a  com- 
paratively early  stage  are  primarily  to  be  dealt  with  by  absolute  rest 
in  the  recumbent  posture.  When  extremely  severe  and  of  long 
duration,  they  may  call  for  the  subcutaneous  injection  of  morphine. 
In  general,  however,  it  is  advisable  to  avoid  the  employment  of 
morphine,  since,  as  the  disease  develops,  its  hopelessness  renders  the 
use  of  morphine  peculiarly  dangerous.  If  possible,  it  is  better  to 
control  the  pains  by  other  measures,  such  as  the  employment  of 
counter-irritation  along  the  course  of  the  affected  nerves  by  a  line 
of  flying  blisters,  or  by  the  application  of  stimulating  liniments. 
The  actual  cautery  has  sometimes  been  recommended,  with  the 
view  of  producing  counter-irritation ;  but  the  pain  of  this  treat- 
ment is,  perhaps,  almost  as  severe  as  the  condition  which  it  is  in- 
tended to  relieve.  To  some  extent  the  pains  may  be  diminished 
by  warm  fomentations  along  the  course  of  the  nerves  affected,  and 
occasionally  the  use  of  a  vapor  or  a  Turkish  bath  may  give  consid- 
erable relief.  It  should  be  remembered  that  the  lightning  pains  of 
locomotor  ataxia  sometimes  cease  quite  abruptly,  independently  of 
treatment,  and  the  practitioner  should,  therefore,  be  upon  his  guard 


390  J^ER  VO  US  DISEASES. 

against  attributing  the  cessation  of  pains  to  any  particular  measures 
that  may  have  been  adopted,  and  consequently  expecting  similar 
benefits  always  to  follow  the  employment  of  the  same  remedies 
under  similar  conditions. 

The  gastric  crises  may  sometimes  be  relieved  by  the  use  of  ordi- 
nary gastric  sedatives,  such  as  bismuth  and  hydrocyanic  acid,  and 
by  the  adoption  of  a  carefully  regidated  diet.  Frequently,  how- 
ever, the  symptoms  continue  in  spite  of  these  measures  and  neces- 
sitate the  employment  of  morphine  in  fairly  large  doses. 

Occasionally,  in  the  course  of  this  disease,  laryngeal  crises  may 
occur.  These  are  characterized  by  spasm  of  the  glottis,  which  in- 
duces considerable  dyspnoea  and  noisy  respiration.  These  symp- 
toms, though  alarming,  are  not  usually  dangerous,  although  an 
instance  has  been  mentioned  in  which  the  patient  died  during  the 
attack.  The  reflex  spasm  may  be  relieved  by  the  application  of 
cocaine,  either  as  a  spray,  or,  if  more  convenient,  by  the  direct 
application  with  a  brush  of  a  2  or  4  per  cent,  solution.  Frequently, 
however,  it  is  far  easier  to  administer  chloroform  during  the  attack, 
or  to  cause  the  patient  to  inhale  amyl  nitrite ;  under  either  of  these 
forms  of  treatment  the  spasm  will  often  be  reduced. 

In  the  late  stages  of  the  disease  bladder  symptoms  are  likely  to 
arise  and  necessitate  the  frequent  employment  of  the  catheter,  since 
expulsive  .power  is  so  greatly  diminished.  It  is  convenient  when 
the  patient  can  be  taught  how  to  employ  the  catheter  himself,  but 
the  risks  attending  upon  lack  of  cleanliness  and  care  in  sterilizing 
the  instrument  should  be  fully  explained  to  him,  since  otherwise 
severe  cystitis  may  result. 

Infantile  Paralysis.  Infantile  paralysis  forms  the  frequent  sequel 
to  an  attack  of  convulsions,  but  it  is  comparatively  rare  for  the  con- 
dition to  be  recognized  at  the  commencement  of  the  disease.  In 
general,  it  is  found  that  the  paralytic  condition  is  only  noticed  as 
the  child  becomes  older. 

The  disease  depends  upon  degenerative  changes  affecting  the  gray 
matter  of  the  cornua  of  the  spinal  cord.  Sometimes  the  onset  is 
marked  by  febrile  symptoms,  and  sometimes  the  paralysis  is  devel- 
oped gradually,  the  condition  being  at  its  worst  within  twenty-four 
hours  from  the  commencement ;  after  this  period  some  degree  of 
improvement  may  gradually  follow,  though  special  groups  of  muscles 
in  one  or  more  limbs  may  remain  affected. 

The  early  treatment  will  probably  have  to  be  undertaken  before 


INFANTILE  PARALYSIS.  391 

an  accurate  diagnosis  has  been  made,  and  it  should  involve  the  use 
of  diaphoretics  or  purgatives  and  the  maintenance  of  absolute  rest. 

When  the  paralytic  element  has  been  recognized,  various  forms 
of  treatment  may  be  adopted.  At  the  commencement  of  the  affec- 
tion massage  or  friction  of  the  affected  muscles  will  frequently  be 
of  service,  and  these  measures  will  serve  to  some  extent  to  maintain 
the  nutrition  of  the  affected  muscles  and  perhaps  to  influence  the 
electric  reaction  of  the  muscle. 

With  the  view  of  promoting  efficient  friction  of  the  limb  it  is  well 
to  advise  the  inunction  of  some  stimulant  application.  Among  out- 
patients at  the  Evelina  Hospital,  I  have  frequently  used  mercurial 
applications,  and  advised  that  these  should  be  rubbed  in  after  the 
child  has  had  a  warm  bath.  I  do  not  attach  much  importance  to 
the  special  form  of  ointment  or  of  liniment  employed,  but  consider 
that  the  value  of  inunction  depends  mainly  upon  the  stimulation  of 
the  muscle  by  friction. 

The  internal  medication  to  some  extent  is  regulated  by  the  con- 
dition and  age  of  the  child.  Frequently  tonic  and  nutritive  reme- 
dies, such  as  cod-liver  oil  or  the  compound  syrup  of  the  hypophos- 
phites,  will  be  of  service ;  and  for  older  children,  or  for  those 
brought  for  treatment  some  time  after  the  condition  has  been  in 
existence,  other  tonics,  such  as  salts  of  quinine  or  of  iron,  or  liquor 
potassii  arsenitis,  may  be  beneficial.  In  the  early  stages,  however, 
potassium  iodide  and  potassium  bromide  appear  to  give  somewhat 
better  results,  the  bromide  being  used  to  allay  nervous  irritation, 
rather  than  from  any  dread  of  the  recurrence  of  convulsions. 

Power  in  the  affected  limb  may  sometimes  be  promoted  by  the 
use  of  electricity,  and  this  treatment  should  be  commenced  as  early 
as  possible.  Interrupted  galvanic  currents  are  of  some  service  from 
the  outset  of  the  disease ;  the  faradic  current  may  also  be  useful  for 
the  muscles  that  are  only  slightly  affected  and  still  respond  to  faradic 
stimulation.  For  those  which  fail  to  react  to  the  faradic  current  an 
interrupted  galvanic  current  should  be  used  daily,  and  the  best 
results  are  obtained  when  alternations  of  the  current  are  found  to 
cause  contraction  of  the  muscle.  These  electric  applications  should 
be  made  solely  over  the  affected  limb  or  muscle,  since  it  does  not 
appear  that  any  advantage  lies  in  the  attempt  to  pass  the  current 
through  the  spinal  cord.  Infantile  paralysis  is  often  productive  of 
serious  deformities  which  require  treatment  by  suitable  apparatus 
and  not  uncommonly  call  for  operative  interference. 


392  NERVOUS  DISEASES. 

Neuralgia.  Neuralgia  is  so  frequently  symptomatic  of  some 
constitutional  affection  that  it  is  essential  to  consider  the  treatment 
with  due  regard  to  the  cause  to  which  the  individual  case  is  to  be 
assigned.  The  treatment,  therefore,  should  primarily  be  directed 
to  the  relief  of  various  constitutional  conditions,  and  secondarily  to 
that  of  the  special  form  of  neuralgia  from  which  the  individual 
suffers.  For  the  latter  purpose  the  remedies  employed  include 
drugs  which  are  given  internally  as  well  as  the  adoption  of  local 
treatment. 

Very  frequently  neuralgia  is  found  to  arise  as  an  indication  of 
ansemia,  or  at  least  in  connection  with  this  condition.  In  these 
cases  the  primary  indication  is  to  adopt  measures  for  the  relief  of 
anaemia  ;  indeed,  treatment  which  ignores  this  condition  is  not 
likely  to  be  successful.  The  treatment  of  ansemia  ordinarily  in- 
volves the  employment  of  some  form  of  iron  or  of  arsenic,  or  the 
two  may  be  given  in  conjunction,  either  as  iron  arsenate,  or,  if  de- 
sired, iron  arsenate  may  be  made  into  a  pill,  either  with  ferrous 
sulphate  or  with  the  saccharated  iron  carbonate. 

Hygienic  measures  must,  as  a  rule,  be  simultaneously  employed, 
such  as  exercise  in  the  open  air,  change  of  air  from  town  to  coun- 
try, or  even  seaside,  the  benefit  being  also  due  generally  to  the 
change  of  society  and  of  occupation  which  absence  from  home  ordi- 
narily involves. 

When  the  appetite  fails  it  may  be  promoted  by  small  doses  of  nux 
vomica,  strychnine,  or  quinine,  which  may  be  given  together  with 
the  iron  as  a  pill.  The  treatment  of  ansemia  and  of  chlorosis  has, 
however,  been  already  dealt  with  so  fully  that  it  is  unnecessary  now 
to  enter  into  greater  detail.  In  neuralgic  patients  ansemic  conditions 
are,  however,  frequently  a  prelude  to  neurasthenia,  which  in  some 
of  its  forms  is  intimately  linked  with  neuralgia.  This  may  entail 
the  use  of  the  Weir  Mitchell  treatment,  either  in  its  complete  form 
or  in  such  modification  as  may  seem  to  be  advisable.  The  Weir 
Mitchell  treatment  involves  the  complete  separation  of  the  patient 
from  her  friends,  together  with  absolute  rest,  over-feeding,  and 
massage.  Unless  the  neurasthenic  element  is  very  strongly  marked 
and  the  patient  is  in  a  condition  of  great  emaciation,  this  treatment 
may  be  much  modified  ;  thus,  for  instance,  it  is  often  found  that 
massage  and  over-feeding  will  together  produce  considerable  benefit. 

Closely  connected  with  this  type  of  neuralgia  is  the  form  which 
ensues  with  nervous  exhaustion  after  prolonged  overwork.     These 


NEURALGIA.  393 

patients  require  rest,  or,  preferably,  change  of  occupation,  since,  in 
general,  enforced  mental  inactivity  leaves  the  mind  to  brood,  and 
perhaps,  by  introspection,  to  develop  new  symptoms  ;  while  these 
undesirable  conditions  may  be  avoided  by  the  substitution  of  some 
new  interest.  I  have  often  Avith  good  effect  advised  bicycle  riding 
in  this  form  of  neuralgia,  and  the  benefit  seems  to  be  largely  the 
result  of  the  necessary  diversion  of  attention  from  ordinary  business 
worries  or  other  sources  of  annoyance. 

Different  forms  of  neuralgia  are  frequently  associated  with  other 
constitutional  conditions,  such  as  may  result  from  malaria,  from 
gout,  or  from  rheumatism ;  and  the  treatment  for  these  respective 
conditions,  by  the  administration  of  quinine,  of  salicylates,  or  of 
alkalies,  iodides,  and  colchicum,  must  be  determined  by  the  consid- 
eration of  each  individual  case.  In  most  of  these  conditions,  anae- 
mia will  demand  attention,  but  the  use  of  tonics  is  rendered  more 
effectual  when  specific  treatment  is  simultaneously  employed. 

Should  there  be  a  distinct  history  of  syphilis,  mercurials  or  iodides 
should  be  used,  either  singly  or  in  combination,  according  to  the  stage 
of  the  disease  and  the  previous  treatment  for  this  condition. 

Turning  next  to  the  remedies  which  may  be  employed  at  the  time 
of  an  attack,  with  the  view  of  giving  immediate  relief  from  pain, 
the  most  important  perhaps  consists  of  the  group  of  so-called  anti- 
pyretics— antipyrine,  acetanilide,  and  phenacetin.  The  value  of  these 
remedies  has  been  widely  recognized  by  the  public,  and  has  led  to 
their  somewhat  indiscriminate  and  incautious  employment.  It  must 
not  be  forgotten  that  there  are  certain  risks  attendant  upon  the  em- 
ployment of  overdoses  of  these  aniline  derivatives,  and  these  dangers 
may  be  increased,  even  when  medicinal  doses  are  employed,  if  exer- 
cise is  indulged  in  immediately  after  the  drug  has  been  taken. 

Phenazone  or  antipyrine  may  be  given  in  doses  of  from  5  to  20 
grains ;  acetanilide  or  antifebrine  in  doses  of  from  1  to  3  grains  ; 
phenacetin  in  doses  of  from  5  to  10  grains.  After  the  employment 
of  any  of  these  remedies  the  patient  should  be  instructed  to  remain 
in  a  recumbent  posture  for  a  few  hours,  as  otherwise  considerable 
depression  of  the  circulation  may  ensue,  and  larger  doses  may  be 
required  for  the  relief  of  pain,  I  have  known  clergymen  and  bar- 
risters who  were  in  the  habit  of  taking  comparatively  large  doses  of 
these  drugs  to  enable  them  to  perform  their  duties  in  spite  of  an 
attack  of  neuralgia,  and  in  general,  although  the  appointed  task  has 
been  fulfilled,  considerable  subsequent  depression  has  resulted. 


394  NER  VO  US  BISEASES. 

These  remedies  are  of  the  greatest  value  in  forms  of  neuralgia 
affecting  the  head  and  leading  to  migraine.  If  used  under  such 
conditions,  a  fairly  large  dose  should  be  taken  at  the  commencement 
of  the  attack,  and  should,  if  necessary,  be  followed  by  a  smaller  dose 
after  three  or  four  hours. 

Recently  exalgine  has  come  into  considerable  favor  for  the  treat- 
ment of  various  forms  of  neuralgia.  This  drug  is  sparingly  soluble 
in  cold  water,  though  it  dissolves  readily  in  diluted  alcohol,  or  in 
the  presence  of  an  equal  weight  of  sodium  salicylate.  Like  the 
foregoing,  if  used  recklessly,  it  is  likely  to  produce  much  palpita- 
tion and  physical  prostration,  accompanied  by  intense  pallor.  This 
drug  has  been  found  to  be  of  considerable  service  in  numerous  forms 
of  neuralgia,  especially  in  those  associated  with  a  rheumatic  or  gouty 
diathesis,  but  if  employed  for  any  length  of  time  the  dose  must  be 
increased.  Ordinarily  from  3  to  5  grains  are  administered  three 
times  a  day,  this  dose  being  employed  either  in  solution  with  sodium 
salicylate,  or  dissolved  in  some  form  of  alcohol,  or  administered  in 
capsule. 

Potassium  bromide  and  caffeine  citrate  are  often  used  by  those 
who  suffer  from  repeated  attacks  of  neuralgia  of  the  type  of  migraine, 
while  in  cases  of  neuralgia  of  the  fifth  nerve  butyl  chloral  hydrate 
is  frequently  used.  The  latter  drug  is  credited  with  special  power 
of  controlling  neuralgia  of  the  fifth  nerve,  but  it  is  not  always  suc- 
cessful, even  when  the  usual  dose  is  considerably  exceeded. 

Butyl  chloral  hydrate  is  often  given  in  combination  with  gelse- 
mium,  ^  or  |  grain  of  the  alcoholic  extract  being  made  up  in  pill 
form  with  2  or  3  grains  of  butyl  chloral  hydrate ;  the  tincture  of 
gelsemium  may  also  be  administered  alone,  in  doses  of  from  5  to  15 
minims. 

Cannabis  indica  is  another  drug  which  is  frequently  used ;  and 
the  extract,  in  doses  of  ^  to  1  grain,  may  be  given  with  butyl  chloral 
hydrate  three  or  four  times  a  day.  It  is  well  to  remember,  however, 
that  this  preparation  is  of  variable  strength,  and  it  is  accordingly 
alway;,;  advisable  to  commence  with  small  doses,  since  toxic  symp- 
toms may  readily  be  induced. 

Nitroglycerin  has  been  recommended  as  an  antineuralgic,  espe- 
cially in  cases  of  inveterate  sciatica.  It  can  best  be  given  in  a  1 
per  cent,  alcoholic  solution,  of  which  the  dose  is  about  3  drops  per 
day,  or  the  following  formula  may  be  employed  : 


J 


NEURALGIA.  395 

R. — Spiritus  glonoini TTLlxxv. 

Tincturse  capsici     .         .         .  .  .  .  .  5Jss. 

Aquae  men thfe  piperitte  .         .         .         .       q.  s.  ad  §ss. 

S. — Five  to  10  drops  in  water  three  times  a  day. 

The  different  members  of  the  belladonna  group  are  also  occasion- 
ally employed  internally  for  the  relief  of  neuralgia,  and  of  these 
extract  of  belladonna  is  the  most  constant  in  strength,  and,  there- 
fore, the  most  reliable.  Preparations  of  belladonna  are,  however, 
more  frequently  employed  externally  than  internally  for  this  condi- 
tion. For  the  hysterical  forms  of  neuralgia  preparations  of  valerian 
are  often  useful,  and  of  these  zinc  valerianate  is  perhaps  of  greatest 
service  if  given  in  conjunction  with  quinine  and  iron.  Zinc  vale- 
rianate, in  doses  of  from  1  to  3  grains,  is  commonly  administered 
as  a  pill,  on  account  of  its  slight  solubility  in  water. 

Preparations  of  cimicif  uga  have  long  been  credited  with  the  power 
of  controlling  neuralgic  pains,  more  particularly  those  associated 
with  a  rheumatic  tendency.  There  are  three  official  preparations  of 
cimicifuga — the  fluid  extract,  to  be  given  in  doses  of  from  5  to  30 
minims ;  the  tincture,  in  doses  of  from  |^  to  1  fluidrachm,  and  the 
extract,  in  doses  of  from  1  to  5  grains. 

For  the  relief  of  that  form  of  neuralgia  which  occurs  as  the  result 
of  excessive  mental  application,  and  which  does  not  appear  to  be  con- 
nected with  any  special  diathesis,  phosphorus  may  sometimes  be  em- 
ployed. The  phosphorus  pill  of  the  Pharmacopceia  contains  j^q  grain 
of  phosphorus  in  each  pill ;  while  the  phosphorated  oil — a  solution 
of  1  per  cent,  of  phosphorus  in  almond  oil — may  be  given  in  doses  of 
from  1  to  5  minims.  Although  many  observers  speak  highly  of  this 
remedy,  it  has  not  given  very  satisfactory  results  in  my  hands,  and 
I  feel  considerable  doubt  of  its  therapeutic  value.  Possibly  some 
of  the  benefits  ascribed  to  phosphorus  should  more  correctly  be 
attributed  to  the  cessation  of  mental  work  or  to  some  other  active 
remedy  given  in  combination,  such  as  quinine  or  nux  vomica,  than 
to  the  phosphorus. 

Various  local  measures  may  be  used  in  addition  to  the  foregoing. 
These  necessarily  are  only  employed  at  the  time  of  the  attack,  while 
many  of  the  forms  of  internal  treatment  already  mentioned  should 
be  continued  during  the  intervals  between  separate  attacks,  although 
they  may  require  to  be  given  in  larger  doses  during  the  time  of  pain. 
Relief  may  frequently  be  obtained  by  measures  which  affect  the  local 
circulation,  and  in  any  individual  case  it  is  often  impossible  to  say 


396  NERVOUS  DISEASES. 

whether  greater  benefit  will  follow  from  the  application  of  cold  or 
from  measures  calculated  to  increase  the  size  of  the  vessels.  As  a 
rule,  cold  applications  produce  more  immediate  relief,  though  this 
may  not  always  prove  to  be  of  a  lasting  nature. 

Pounded  ice,  or  a  mixture  of  pounded  ice  and  salt,  may  occasion- 
ally be  extremely  beneficial  when  the  nerve  affected  is  superficial ; 
cold  may  also  be  produced  by  the  rapid  evaporation  of  ether  or  of 
methyl  chloride.  The  last-named  should  be  used  only  for  a  few 
seconds  at  a  time,  on  account  of  the  tendency  to  cause  sloughing  if 
the  application  is  more  prolonged. 

With  more  deep-seated  forms  of  pain,  relief  may  sometimes  be 
obtained  by  the  application  of  warm  poultices,  or  of  other  forms  of 
counter-irritation,  such  as  blistering  fluids  or  a  blistering  plaster. 
Any  of  these  forms  of  counter-irritation  must,  however,  be  used 
somewhat  tentatively,  since  they  frequently  increase  the  pain  instead 
of  diminishing  it. 

Of  the  local  anodynes,  menthol  is  perhaps  the  favorite  in  the  mild 
forms  of  neuralgia.  Aconite  is,  however,  frequently  employed,  but 
it  is  wholly  unsuitable  when  the  neuralgia  affects  the  face,  on  account 
of  the  extreme  frequency  with  which  oedematous  swelling  ensues 
after  its  application.  Even  when  applied  at  a  considerable  distance 
from  the  eyes  I  have  known  intense  ocular  pain  and  irritation  ensue 
from  the  use  of  aconite. 

For  neuralgia  affecting  the  intercostal  nerves  or  the  sciatic  nerve 
the  tincture  of  aconite  is,  however,  a  valuable  remedy,  speedily  pro- 
ducing a  local  tingling  and  then  numbness,  which  replaces  the  pain» 
In  extreme  forms  of  neuralgia  morphine  is  sometimes  injected  locally. 
It  should  be  remembered,  however,  that  neuralgia  frequently  occurs 
under  conditions  when  the  formation  of  a  drug  habit  is  likely  to  be 
a  temptation ;  hence,  it  is  well  to  defer  the  use  of  morphine  if  pos- 
sible. The  same  remark  applies  to  the  local  injection  of  cocaine. 
The  frequency  with  which  neuralgic  attacks  recur  increases  the  ten- 
dency to  self-medication. 

In  some  intractable  forms  of  neuralgia  relief  is  occasionally 
afforded  by  the  deep  injection  of  a  small  quantity  of  pure  water, 
while  in  sciatica  and  lumbago  acupuncture  has  frequently  been 
employed ;  this  consists  in  driving  a  stout  needle  deeply  into  the 
tissues  in  the  course  of  the  affected  nerve,  so  as,  if  possible,  to  reach 
the  nerve. 

Numerous  surgical  measures  have  been  recommended  at  various 


NEURALGIA.  397 

times  for  the  relief  of  obstinate  forms  of  neuralgia,  and  these  vary 
in  severity  according  to  the  nature  of  the  case.  The  affected  nerve 
may  be  stretched  or  a  portion  of  the  nerve  may  be  removed,  and 
some  success  has  been  claimed  for  the  removal  of  the  Gasserian 
ganglion.  It  must  be  admitted,  however,  that  frequently,  in  spite 
of  these  somewhat  formidable  operations,  the  neuralgic  pain  returns 
and  has  yet  to  be  controlled,  either  by  medicinal  means  or  by  hyp- 
notic suggestion. 


CHAPTER   XVII. 

NERVOUS   DISEASES— Continued. 

Headache — Insomnia — Alcoholism  —  Acute  Alcoholism  —  Chronic  Alcoholism — 
Alcoholic  Neuritis — Delirium  Tremens — Apoplexy — Meningitis — Tubercular 
Meningitis. 

Headache.  In  the  preceding  pages  numerous  references  have 
been  made  to  headache,  and  it  will  perhaps  be  helpful  to  summarize 
here  the  chief  conditions  under  which  this  symptom  may  arise. 

Headache  may  be  dependent  upon  disorders  of  the  digestive  sys- 
tem, disorders  of  the  circulatory  system,  of  the  nervous  system,  or 
of  the  kidneys,  and  it  is  frequently  symptomatic  of  different  febrile 
affections,  as,  for  example,  of  typhoid  fever. 

It  is  obvious  from  this  brief  enumeration  that  the  treatment  must 
depend  upon  the  cause.  Attempts  are  often  made  to  distinguish  the 
different  forms  of  headache  by  the  area  affected  ;  thus,  frontal  head- 
ache has  been  considered  to  be  of  digestive  origin ;  headache  affect- 
ing the  vertex  has  been  referred  to  defect  in  the  blood-supply,  either 
resulting  from  alterations  in  the  blood,  as,  for  example,  anaemia  and 
chlorosis,  or  from  alterations  in  the  character  of  the  circulation  ; 
while  occipital  headaches  have  been  commonly  ascribed  to  neuralgic 
conditions  or  to  other  changes  in  the  nervous  system.  Although 
these  distinctions  are  occasionally  of  service,  they  are  extremely 
arbitrary ;  and  many  forms  of  headache  of  nervous  type  may  affect 
the  frontal  region  or  even  the  vertex,  while  digestive  headache  is 
frequently  of  a  diffuse  character  which  defies  accurate  localization. 

The  headache  which  results  from  constipation  and  that  which  is 
dependent  upon  deficient  action  of  the  kidney  may  be  regarded  as 
due  to  defective  elimination  or  at  least  to  the  retention  of  some 
toxic  material.  Both  these  forms  of  headache  are  to  be  treated  by 
eliminative  measures,  the  former  by  mild  purgatives,  the  latter  by 
purgatives  and  perhaps  also  by  diaphoretic  measures.  The  headache 
of  dyspepsia  is,  in  addition,  to  be  dealt  with  by  the  use  of  alkaline 
remedies  and  by  gastric  sedatives  whenever  there  is  any  indication  of 
defective  gastric  function.  On  the  other  hand,  although  the  head- 
ache of  anaemia  is  best  treated  by  hsematinics  and  by  tonics,  these 


HEADACHE.  399 

remedies  are  employed  specially  for  the  cure  of  the  anaemia,  and 
other  local  or  general  sedatives  may  be  adopted  for  the  immediate 
relief  of  the  headache. 

The  headache  of  febrile  affections  is,  in  all  probability,  compar- 
able to  the  toxic  forms  of  pain  above  mentioned,  and  is  dependent 
upon  the  presence  of  waste  products  in  the  blood.  Frequently  very 
little  can  be  done  to  relieve  this  form  of  headache ;  for  example,  in 
typhoid  fever  the  pain  may  perhaps  be  reduced  by  quiet  and  by  the 
avoidance  of  mental  excitement,  and  sometimes  antipyretic  measures 
are  found  to  be  beneficial.  In  general,  however,  the  adoption  of 
these  measures  is  determined  rather  by  the  high  fever  than  by  the 
amount  of  headache. 

In  disease  of  the  kidneys  persistent  headache  appears  occasion- 
ally to  depend  upon  high  blood-pressure,  and  this  may  be  relieved 
by  the  use  of  nitroglycerin  or  of  erythrol  tetranitrate.  These  reme- 
dies are  of  the  greatest  service  when  headache  arises  in  connection 
with  cirrhosis  of  the  kidney,  but  they  are  less  valuable  for  the  relief 
of  the  headache  of  acute  nephritis  or  of  that  which  occurs  during 
the  exacerbations  of  chronic  nephritis,  these  conditions  being  more 
likely  to  give  rise  to  headache  of  a  toxic  nature  than  to  headache  of 
high  tension. 

The  headache  primarily  dependent  upon  affections  of  the  nervous 
system  is  perhaps  the  form  which  is  most  readily  amenable  to  treat- 
ment. When  caused  by  excessive  mental  strain,  and  especially  if  asso- 
ciated with  sleeplessness,  hypnotics  and  sedatives  may  be  of  consider- 
able service.  As  a  rule,  it  is  better  to  avoid  the  use  of  oj)ium  for 
the  treatment  of  headache,  since,  by  favoring  constipation  and  other 
dyspeptic  troubles,  it  may  increase  the  discomfort,  even  though  it 
affords  temporary  relief.  Small  doses  of  chloral  hydrate  and  am- 
monium bromide  are  frequently  of  great  service  for  the  headache  of 
worry  and  sleeplessness ;  this  condition,  however,  often  necessitates 
the  cessation  of  ordinary  occupations  and  change  of  surroundings. 

The  following  mixtures  may  be  prescribed  : 


B.- 


-Potassii  bromidi      .... 

gr.  X. 

Ammonii  carbonatis 

gr-  iij- 

Aquse  menthse  piperitse  . 

SJ- 

Potassii  bromidi     .... 

gr.  XX 

Tincturse  cardamomi  compositse 

mx. 

Aquse  cinnamomi   .... 

.       q.  s. 

ad 

ij- 

400  NERVOUS  DISEASES. 

Although  it  is  not  usual  to  combine  strychnine  and  a  bromide,  the 
following  occasionally  proves  valuable  : 

iJ;. — Potassii  bromidi     .......  gr.  xv. 

Ammonii  chloridi  .......  gr.  xv. 

StrychninEe  hydrochloratis      .....  gr.^\. 

Infusi  gentianjB  compositi        .         .         .         ,         •  3J' 

The  form  of  headache  which  has  been  described  as  nervous  is 
sometimes  fairly  rapidly  relieved  by  the  use  of  acetanilide,  phenac- 
etin,  or  phenazone,  which  should,  however,  be  employed  under  med-p» 
ical  advice  only  and  taken  when  the  patient  can  go  to  bed  or  remain 
at  rest  after  the  use  of  these  drugs.  These  remedies  will  sometimes 
relieve  the  form  of  headache  described  as  migraine  or  megrim,  but 
for  this  condition  rest  is  essential ;  frequently,  also,  caffeine  may  be 
found  to  be  of  service.  In  attacks  of  migraine  this  drug  may  be 
prescribed  with  sodium  salicylate  : 

R. — Sodii  salicylatis      .......      gr.  xx. 

CafFeinse  citratse  effervescentis  .         .         .         .      ,^ij. 

Ft.  Dosis.     To  be  taken  in  half  a  wineglass  of  water,  and  repeated  every 
two  or  three  hours  until  the  headache  is  relieved. 

Migraine  is,  however,  to  be  regarded  as  a  condition  in  which  the 
individual  temperament  plays  an  important  part,  since  remedies 
which  may  be  highly  successful  for  some  patients  fail  absolutely 
with  others.  It  is  well  known  that  with  some  forms  of  migraine 
relief  follows  the  act  of  vomiting,  and  measures  to  promote  this  may 
sometimes  be  of  service.  In  every  case,  however,  relief  ensues  with 
sleep,  and  accordingly  the  patient  instinctively  retires  to  a  darkened 
room  to  try  to  procure  sleep.  Every  now  and  then,  however,  it  will 
be  found  that  the  horizontal  position  appears  to  increase  rather  than 
to  diminish  pain,  and  under  such  circumstances  greater  relief  is 
often  obtained  by  the  use  of  evaporating  lotions  of  menthol  than 
from  any  of  the  above-mentioned  drugs. 

Although  headache  is  frequently  best  dealt  with  by  rest,  yet  when 
it  results  from  incessant  mental  application  or  from  prolonged  bodily 
inactivity,  brisk  muscular  exercise  is  often  of  considerable  value, 
partly  perhaps  on  account  of  the  aid  to  the  eliminative  work  of  the 
various  excretory  organs  and  partly  from  the  change  of  occupation 
enforcing  repose  for  the  overworked  portions  of  the  brain.  If  head- 
ache returns  whenever  the  patient  attempts  to  undertake  any  study, 
the  possibility  of  ocular  affections  should  be  borne  in  mind  ;  the  sight 


INS03INIA.  401 

should  be  carefully  tested,  and  any  errors  of  accommodation  should 
be  dealt  with  by  appropriate  spectacles. 

The  headache  of  the  gouty  diathesis  is,  as  a  rule,  best  treated  by 
purgatives  and  by  exercise,  though  many  observers  strongly  ad- 
vocate the  use  of  sodium  salicylate  and  the  avoidance  of  animal 
food. 

Insomnia.  Insomnia  is  symptomatic  of  so  many  conditions  that, 
although  it  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  a  disease,  it  may  save  time  and 
reference  to  different  parts  of  this  book  to  consider  the  treatment  of 
this  symptom  in  one  place. 

ISTo  treatment  of  insomnia  is  satisfactory  which  ignores  the  con- 
ditions under  which  the  symptom  arises.  It  may  originate  in  some 
trifling  error  of  diet  or  of  habit,  or  it  may  be  a  symptom  of  some 
serious  organic  disease,  and  it  is  obviously  impossible  and  irrational 
to  deal  with  all  forms  of  insomnia  by  the  routine  administration  of 
hypnotic  remedies  without  endeavoring  to  ascertain  the  exciting 
cause.  With  regard  to  the  errors  which  are  capable  of  alteration, 
the  chief,  perhaps,  are  those  which  depend  upon  consumption  late 
in  the  evening  of  some  indigestible  article  of  diet  or  some  cerebral 
stimulant  Strong  tea,  or  strong  coffee,  will  frequently  cause  in- 
somnia, and  a  full  meal  taken  late  at  night  may  have  the  same 
effect.  On  the  other  hand,  however,  sleeplessness  sometimes  results 
from  an  insufficiency  of  food.  Those  who  dine  early  and  work  late 
at  night  frequently  suffer  from  sleeplessness,  which  can  readily  be 
controlled  either  by  discontinuance  of  work  for  an  hour  or  so  before 
retiring  to  rest  or  by  taking  some  slight  nourishment  just  before 
going  to  bed. 

Those  who  lead  sedentary  lives  are  apt  to  be  troubled  by  weak 
circulation,  and  may  suffer  from  sleeplessness  produced  by  deficient 
circulation  through  the  feet — a  condition  which  may  be  prevented 
either  by  sitting  with  the  feet  in  a  rug,  or  by  wearing  warmer  cloth- 
ing, or  by  some  hot  drink  taken  late  at  night.  Sleeplessness  arising 
from  this  cause  can  often  be  treated  satisfactorily  by  drinking  a 
small  quantity  of  hot  water  or  hot  milk,  or  by  taking  a  brisk  walk 
shortly  before  retiring  to  rest.  Should  these  measures  fail,  a  hot- 
water  bottle  will  sometimes  succeed,  or  benefit  may  be  derived  from 
bathing  the  feet  in  hot  water  and  either  wearing  warm  woollen  socks 
or  sleeping  between  blankets. 

When  the  habit  depends  upon  disorders  of  digestion,  such  as 
acidity,  or  upon  habitual  constipation,  these  conditions  can  readily 

26 


402  NERVOUS  DISEASES. 

be  dealt  with,  the  former  by  the  use  of  a  little  sodium  bicarbonate 
with  hot  water,  the  latter  by  purgatives. 

Sleeplessness  frequently  ensues  when  the  occupation  involves  in- 
tellectual work  which  is  continued  until  bedtime.  This  can  only 
be  satisfactorily  dealt  with  by  total  alteration  of  habits  of  work. 
Some  individuals  may  find  the  cessation  of  the  ordinary  occupation 
and  a  short  period  spent  over  light  literature  suffice  to  distract  the 
attention  from  the  engrossing  thoughts  of  the  day.  Some  find  that 
tobacco  will  exert  a  sedative  influence,  though  for  others  the  result 
of  smoking  is  to  cause  palpitation  and  sleeplessness.  For  the  emo- 
tional causes,  which  include  a  considerable  number  of  the  victims  of 
insomnia,  it  is  impossible  to  lay  down  any  general  rule  for  guidance. 
Change  of  air  and  scene  may  perhaps  be  beneficial  in  some  cases,  but 
the  curative  value  of  time  cannot  be  ignored. 

When  sleeplessness  depends  upon  the  existence  of  pain  of  a  phys- 
ical character,  appropriate  remedies  must  be  employed,  according  to 
the  cause,  if  the  condition  is  one  which  is  capable  of  being  dealt  with 
either  by  surgical  or  other  remedial  measures.  Should  it  be  impos- 
sible, however,  to  afford  relief  in  this  way — as,  for  example,  in  cases 
of  cancer  of  some  internal  organ — a  narcotic  must  be  used ;  the  only 
drug  which  can  really  be  trusted  to  relieve  pain  sufficiently  to  pro- 
mote sleep  is  opium  in  its  various  forms.  This  is  almost  the  only 
condition  in  which  it  is  permissible  to  employ  opium  or  morphine 
as  a  matter  of  routine,  while  for  the  more  simple  forms  of  insomnia, 
independently  of  any  definite  structural  disease,  it  is  better  to  resort 
to  some  other  remedy  which  is  less  likely  to  give  rise  to  the  forma- 
tion of  the  drug  habit. 

When  sleeplessness  depends  upon  prolonged  mental  activity  or 
anxiety,  potassium  bromide  or  ammonium  bromide  may  be  employed 
with  considerable  success,  and  there  is  comparatively  little  risk  in 
connection  with  these  drugs,  provided  that  their  use  is  interrupted 
from  time  to  time  and  discontinued  at  the  earliest  possible  moment ; 
in  fact,  in  the  treatment  of  all  forms  of  insomnia,  independent  of 
structural  disease,  the  leading  principle  should  be  to  check  the  habit 
of  wakefulness  and  then  to  discontinue  the  use  of  the  drug.  With 
potassium  bromide  it  is  especially  important  to  check  the  adminis- 
tration at  an  early  date,  since,  if  used  every  night,  the  dose  employed 
must  be  increased,  and,  notwithstanding  the  sleep  resulting  from  its 
use,  the  patient  is  apt  to  become  depressed  and  morbid. 

These  dangers  are  still  greater  in  connection  with  chloral  hydrate, 


INSOMNIA.  403 

which  is  frequently  used  for  the  relief  of  insomnia.  When  chloral 
hydrate  is  given  alone  and  only  occasionally  employed,  its  effects 
will  probably  be  beneficial ;  but  when  the  sleeplessness  is  the  result 
of  neurasthenia  or  of  other  emotional  disturbance  the  dose  of  chloral 
hydrate  is  likely  to  be  gradually  increased  and  the  chloral  habit 
established.  Chloral  hydrate  should  not  be  used  for  patients  suffering 
from  weakness  of  the  heart,  nor  should  it  be  employed  on  successive 
nights.  In  neurotic  patients  I  have  often  seen  great  disadvantage 
resulting  from  the  injudiciously  repeated  use  of  chloral  hydrate.  The 
dangers  of  this  drug  may,  perhaps,  be  somewhat  reduced  by  its 
combination  with  ammonium  bromide,  the  unpleasant  taste  of  the 
latter  diminishing  the  temptation  to  the  formation  of  the  drug  habit. 

Reference  has  already  been  made  to  the  value  of  opium  and  of 
morphine  for  inducing  sleep  when  rest  is  disturbed  by  the  existence 
of  pain.  These  drugs  are  also  frequently  of  considerable  service  for 
the  relief  of  sleeplessness  at  the  commencement  of  mild  febrile  attacks, 
and  for  this  purpose  they  possess  special  value  on  account  of  their 
diaphoretic  action.  At  the  commencement  of  a  feverish  cold  there 
may  be  restlessness  so  long  as  the  skin  is> hot  and  dry,  while  as  soon 
as  it  becomes  moist,  as  the  result  of  a  full  dose  of  powder  of  ipecacu- 
anha and  opium,  the  patient  usually  sinks  into  a  quiet  sleep.  Opiates 
are  obviously  only  required  occasionally  for  this  purpose,  and  should 
certainly  not  be  persisted  in  night  after  night,  even  in  conditions  of 
feverishness.  When  repeated  use  is  recommended  for  any  special 
reason,  the  after-effects  of  opium  must  be  kept  in  mind,  and  the  dose 
should  either  be  regulated  so  as  to  produce  as  little  discomfort  as 
possible,  or,  if  a  large  dose  is  required,  some  corrective  must  be  sub- 
sequently used  to  prevent  headache,  nausea,  or  constipation. 

For  the  persistent  wakefulness  of  some  forms  of  insanity  morphine 
is  occasionally  used  hypodermatically,  but  its  disadvantages  are  so 
great  that  many  other  drugs  are  generally  used  in  preference  ;  indeed, 
many  of  the  newer  hypnotics  have  been  employed  primarily  for  the 
relief  of  the  insomnia  of  insanity.  Foremost  among  these  must  be 
mentioned  hyoscine  hydrobromate,  the  early  history  of  which  was 
largely  connected  with  experience  in  lunatic  asylums.  This  drug, 
however,  has  now  much  extended  its  sphere  of  usefulness,  being 
employed  under  many  of  the  conditions  of  sleeplessness  where 
opiates,  morphine,  and  chloral  hydrate  are  distinctly  contraindicated  ; 
thus,  for  example,  in  the  sleeplessness  due  to  chronic  renal  disease, 
or  to  other  conditions  leading  to  high  tension,  hyoscine  is  extremely 


404  NEBVOUS  DISEASES. 

serviceable,  and  although,  like  many  of  the  hypnotics,  it  sometimes 
fails,  yet  it  is  often  found  that  even  very  moderate  doses  suffice  to 
break  the  habit  of  sleeplessness. 

This  drug  is  of  particular  service  also  in  connection  with  delirium 
tremens,  since  in  this  disease  the  condition  of  the  heart,  and  fre- 
quently the  diseased  condition  of  the  kidneys,  render  the  use  of 
opium  and  of  chloral  hydrate  somewhat  dangerous.  On  account  of 
the  delirium  which  is  sometimes  excited  by  the  hyoscine,  and  also 
on  account  of  the  frequent  desire  to  avoid  hypodermatic  administra- 
tion, hyoscine  is  generally  only  used  in  these  somewhat  special  forms 
of  insomnia,  while  for  many  forms  connected  with  advancing  years 
and  requiring  the  repeated  administration  of  some  hypnotic  remedy, 
sulphonal  or  paraldehyde  is  more  likely  to  be  selected. 

The  use  of  sulphonal  is  attended  by  sundry  difficulties,  the  chief 
being  its  insoluble  character,  which  not  only  influences  the  mode  of 
administration,  but  affects  also  the  rate  of  absorption,  and  hence  the 
rapidity  of  action.  Sulphonal  may  be  given  with  hot  bread  and 
milk  or  hot  gruel,  or  it  is  frequently  stirred  up  with  a  little  hot 
broth.  The  dose  should  be  taken  half  an  hour  or  more  before 
retiring  to  rest,  since  if  taken  at  bedtime  it  frequently  fails  to  in- 
duce sleep,  and  its  slow  absorption  renders  the  patient  somewhat 
drowsy  during  the  following  day.  In  addition,  sulphonal  occasion- 
ally, especially  in  large  doses,  may  produce  mild  ataxic  symptoms 
and  a  staggering  gait.  On  account  of  the  relative  solubility  of  this 
drug  in  alcohol  many  prefer  taking  the  small  dose  of  10  or  20  grains 
with  hot  whiskey  and  water  during  the  course  of  the  evening,  and 
there  can  be  little  doubt  that  under  such  circumstances  the  resulting 
sleep  is  due  in  part  to  sulphonal,  in  part  also  to  alcohol.  Sulphonal 
is  particularly  serviceable  in  the  sleeplessness  of  old  people,  and  the 
fact  that  the  dose  may  frequently  be  gradually  reduced  until  as  little 
as  5  grains  at  night  can  be  trusted  to  secure  sleep  is  much  in  its 
favor. 

The  chief  disadvantages,  perhaps,  in  connection  with  this  drug  is 
that  it  may  be  used  as  an  excuse  for  the  gradual  formation  of  the 
alcoholic  habit,  and  it  is,  therefore,  frequently  necessary  to  advise  its 
discontinuance  from  time  to  time,  and  perhaps  to  substitute  some 
other  drug  if  the  complaint  of  sleeplessness  has  not  been  overcome. 

Paraldehyde  can  be  used  in  the  same  class  of  cases  as  sulphonal, 
though  it  has  the  disadvantage  of  causing  a  persistent  odor  to  remain 
about  the  patient  for  many  hours  during  the  elimination  of  the  drug 


ALCOHOLISM  AND  DELIRIUM  TREMENS.  405 

by  the  lungs.  Further,  paraldehyde  may  also  cause  some  dyspepsia 
and  loss  of  appetite  ;  hence,  it  is  improbable  that  this  drug  will  be 
used  without  actual  necessity.  The  unpleasant  taste  of  paraldehyde 
may  sometimes  be  concealed  by  the  administration  of  the  dose  in  one 
or  more  capsules,  or  by  giving  it  together  Avith  some  form  of  syrup. 
Paraldehyde  acts  much  more  promptly  than  sulphonal,  and,  apart 
from  its  influence  upon  digestion,  which  has  been  already  referred 
to,  it  does  not  produce  any  disagreeable  after-effects. 

Among  the  hypnotics  of  fairly  recent  introduction,  chloralamide, 
trional,  and  tetronal  have  been  recommended.  Chloralamide  is  by 
many  preferred  to  chloral,  and  it  does  not  appear  to  be  so  liable  to 
depress  the  circulation  or  to  disturb  the  digestion.  The  chief  objec- 
tion to  its  employment  lies  in  the  unpleasant  taste.  On  account  of 
their  insoluble  character,  trional  and  tetronal  require  to  be  given 
under  similar  conditions  to  sulphonal ;  both  of  these  are  credited 
with  greater  rapidity  of  action. 

Chloroform  is  frequently  of  considerable  service  when  sleepless- 
ness is  associated  with  delirium,  as,  for  example,  in  delirium  tremens 
or  in  exaggerated  forms  of  hysteria.  There  is  also  reason  to  believe 
that  this  drug  is  somewhat  commonly  used  by  nurses  after  having 
been  on  night  duty  ;  this  use  of  the  drug  is  distinctly  to  be  depre- 
cated, as  the  self -administration  of  chloroform  from  a  handkerchief 
may  be  attended  with  very  considerable  risks. 

In  conclusion,  I  would  once  more  lay  stress  upon  the  importance 
of  ascertaining  the  cause  of  the  insomnia  before  attempting  to  deal 
with  the  condition  by  hypnotic  drugs.  Although  frequently  depend- 
ent upon  some  physiological  error,  insomnia  is  also  frequently  the 
result  of  habit,  and  perhaps  of  a  firm  conviction  that  wakeful- 
ness will  persist  until  some  drug  has  been  taken.  In  many  cases 
of  hysterical  insomnia,  the  hypodermatic  injection  of  a  few  drops  of 
aqua  pura,  or  the  use  of  a  solution  of  sodium  chloride  at  bedtime, 
may  be  followed  by  sound,  refreshing  sleep.  It  must  be  admitted, 
however,  that  occasionally  insomnia  may  persist  in  spite  of  almost 
every  known  drug,  even  when  given  in  large  doses,  while  it  may  ulti- 
mately yield  to  a  combination  of  two  or  three  hypnotics  in  small  doses. 

Alcoholism  and  Delirium  Tremens.  It  will  perhaps  be  conve- 
nient to  consider  these  conditions  together,  since  they  are  both  the 
results  of  over-indulgence  in  drink.  Alcoholism  may  require  treat- 
ment in  three  distinct  forms  :  (1)  As  the  result  of  acute  alcoholism, 
(2)  as  chronic  alcoholism,  and  (3)  delirium  tremens. 


406  NERVOUS  DISEASES. 

1.  Acute  Alcoholism.  The  treatment  of  the  first  condition — of 
acute  alcoholism — must  to  a  large  extent  depend  upon  the  symptoms. 
Mere  drunkenness  may  require  but  little  treatment  beyond  repose, 
especially  if  the  alcoholic  bout  has  been  succeeded  by  vomiting. 
Advice  may  be  sought  either  on  account  of  coma  or  on  account  of 
wild  excitement.  Both  conditions  may  be  treated  Avith  hypodermatic 
injections  of  apomorphine,  though  the  comatose  state  is  perhaps 
better  dealt  with  by  means  of  the  stomach-pump,  or,  when  the  coma 
is  less  severe,  by  the  administration  of  zinc  sulphate  if  consciousness 
is  sufficiently  retained  to  permit  of  swallowing. 

The  vomiting  produced  by  apomorphine  is  commonly  succeeded 
by  some  degree  of  depression  and  by  comparative  freedom  from 
maniacal  excitement.  When  large  quantities  of  spirits  have  been 
taken  there  may  be  much  collapse,  with  failure  of  the  heart's  action 
and  coldness  of  the  extremities.  These  symptoms  are  not  infre- 
quently seen  in  the  foolish  examples  of  drinking  for  a  wager,  and 
they  call  for  the  utmost  care  in  maintaining  the  strength  of  the 
circulation  by  subcutaneous  injections  of  ether,  and  the  warmth  of 
the  extremities  by  the  use  of  hot  bottles,  or  hot  drinks,  or  friction. 

It  is  perhaps  scarcely  necessary  here  to  insert  a  word  of  warning 
against  the  foolish  error  of  mistaking  the  coma  due  to  cerebral  dis- 
ease or  to  uraemia  for  alcoholism,  merely  because  the  breath  smells 
of  alcohol. 

2.  Chronic  Alcoholism.  With  regard  to  chronic  alcoholism,  the 
treatment  must  be  mainly  symptomatic,  since  this  condition  induces 
disease  of  various  organs ;  as,  for  example,  catarrh  of  the  stomach 
or  of  the  intestines,  cirrhosis  of  the  liver,  alcoholic  tremor  or  neu- 
ritis, or,  perhaps,  granular  disease  of  the  kidney.  The  treatment  of 
most  of  these  various  conditions  has  been  dealt  with  to  a  certain  ex- 
tent in  preceding  pages. 

The  first  essential  is,  naturally,  the  discontinuance  of  the  habit, 
and  in  almost  every  instance  this  seems  difficult  to  attain  unless  the 
patient  is  willing  to  go  into  one  of  the  homes  for  inebriates.  The 
best  resolutions  are  apt  to  fail  before  temptation  ;  and,  as  with  other 
forms  of  indulgence  with  drugs,  such  as  morphine  or  cocaine,  the 
patients  are  apt  to  become  deceitful  and  untruthful,  and  to  counter- 
act all  efforts  made  to  check  the  habit  if  by  any  possibility  they  can 
satisfy  their  craving.  In  breaking  the  habit  one  of  the  most  trouble- 
some symptoms  that  are  apt  to  arise  is  that  of  sleeplessness,  and  even 
in  homes  for  inebriates  some  special  hypnotic  has  usually  to  be  em- 


ALCOHOLISM  AND  DELIRIUM  TREMENS.  407 

ployed  at  the  commencement  of  the  treatment,  as,  for  example, 
hyoscine,  paraldehyde,  or  bromide. 

Alcoholic  neuritis  must  be  treated  by  rest  in  bed  and  by  massage, 
though  at  the  commencement  of  the  treatment  the  pain  in  the  muscles 
may  be  almost  too  great  to  permit  of  more  than  gentle  friction.  In 
addition  to  massage,  the  treatment  with  interrupted  currents  is  often 
valuable,  while  appetite  has  to  be  maintained  by  the  administration 
of  either  quinine  or  strychnine.  Preparations  of  arsenic  are  some- 
times valuable,  but  frequently  the  chronic  alcoholism  has  set  up  too 
much  gastric  irritation  to  permit  of  their  employment.  At  one  time 
the  use  of  cocaine,  or  of  the  fluid  extract  of  cocoa,  was  recommended 
to  diminish  the  craving  for  alcohol  during  the  early  days  of  treat- 
ment. At  the  present  time  this  remedy  is  not  very  much  used  in 
these  cases,  on  account  of  the  great  risks  of  the  formation  of  the 
cocaine  habit,  the  results  of  which  are  as  disastrous  as  the  results  of 
alcoholism. 

It  is  not  necessary  to  enter  into  detail  here  concerning  the  treat- 
ment of  gastric  or  intestinal  catarrh,  or  of  cirrhotic  changes  of  the 
liver,  with  their  sequelae,  or  of  conditions  affecting  the  kidney,  since 
these  various  subjects  have  been  fully  dealt  with  already. 

3.  Delirium  Tremens.  Delirium  tremens  is  ordinarily  referred  to 
excesses  with  alcohol,  but  its  occurrence  is  not  solely  to  be  attributed 
to  the  amount  of  alcohol  taken.  It  involves  previous  alcoholic  habits, 
with  consequent  deterioration  of  brain  power  and  with  perhaps  rapid 
diminution  in  the  nutrition.  In  these  cases  the  habit  of  intemper- 
ance has  ordinarily  led  to  considerable  gastritis,  and  the  consequent 
misery  and  loss  of  appetite  have  been,  for  a  time,  met  by  an  increase 
in  the  amount  of  stimulant  taken.  Delirium  tremens  is,  therefore, 
closely  allied  to  delirium  from  exhaustion,  and  this  fact  must  be 
remembered  in  the  treatment,  since  one  of  the  first  elements  of  suc- 
cess consists  in  the  administration  of  nutriment. 

That  the  delirium  is  not  merely  the  result  of  excess  of  alcohol  is 
shown  by  the  rarity  with  which  it  occurs  among  those  who  are  only 
intermittently  intemperate.  The  dependence  of  delirium  tremens 
upon  faulty  nutrition,  as  well  as  upon  excesses  with  alcohol,  is  fur- 
ther demonstrated  by  the  comparative  rapidity  with  which  recovery 
occurs  so  soon  as  nutrition  can  be  established. 

The  risks  of  delirium  tremens  are,  however,  numerous,  and  they 
depend  to  a  certain  extent  upon  the  organic  condition  of  the  indi- 
vidual, upon  the  development  of  various  complications,  or  upon  the 


408  NERVOUS  DISEASES. 

danger  of  injury  during  the  stage  of  delirium.  Of  these  three  risks, 
the  last  mentioned  is  the  one  which  may  be  dealt  with  first,  since  in 
nearly  every  case  of  delirium  tremens  it  is  possible  that  the  patient 
may,  under  the  influence  of  alarm,  endeavor  to  escape,  and,  with  no 
intention  of  committing  suicide,  may  jump  from  a  window.  The 
first  essential,  therefore,  is  the  selection  of  a  room,  which  should  be 
quiet  and  not  too  brilliantly  lighted.  If  this  room  must  of  necessity 
be  near  the  top  of  the  building,  great  care  should  be  taken  that  the 
window  of  the  room  fastens,  and  that  the  patient  is  not  left  alone 
for  a  moment  on  any  pretext.  In  hospitals  the  room  set  apart  for 
such  cases  is  ordinarily  upon  the  ground  floor,  and  the  window  is 
securely  protected  either  with  bars  or  with  wire  netting  adequately 
secured.  The  room  should  contain  the  minimum  of  furniture,  and 
no  article  should  be  allowed  which  might  be  turned  to  account  as 
weapons  in  the  excitement  of  delirium.  It  is  generally  advisable, 
and  sometimes  imperative,  to  keep  the  patient  in  bed  from  the  ear- 
liest stage,  and  to  have  an  attendant  capable  of  exercising  judicious 
control  and  restraint  rather  than  one  prepared  to  enter  into  physical 
contests.  Frequently  a  nurse  with  tact  and  gentleness  will  succeed 
in  keeping  the  patient  in  his  bed  and  in  restraining  much  of  the 
restlessness  and  excitement ;  while  another  who  is  physically  stronger 
may  have  considerable  difficulty  and  frequent  contests.  It  is  far 
easier  to  keep  the  patient  in  bed  than  to  persuade  him  to  return 
after  having  once  allowed  him  to  get  up. 

When  the  delirium  is  extreme  it  may  be  necessary  to  limit  the 
movements,  either  by  a  sheet  passed  across  the  body  and  securely 
fastened  under  the  mattress,  or,  in  rare  instances,  by  the  use  of  the 
strait  waistcoat.  The  latter  measure  is  to  be  avoided,  if  possible,  on 
account  of  the  mental  excitement  which  sometimes  ensues  owing  to 
the  inability  of  the  patient  to  perform  any  desired  movement ;  the 
strait  waistcoat,  however,  may  occasionally  assist  in  promoting  sleep 
when  other  means  have  failed. 

The  importance  of  controlling  the  movements  of  a  patient  suffer- 
ing from  delirium  tremens  is  not  limited  to  the  risk  of  his  escape, 
or  of  his  injuring  himself  or  the  attendant  in  the  delirium  ;  but  any 
violent  struggles  might  prove  fatal  to  one  who  is  probably  suffering 
from  a  weak  circulation  ;  hence  the  need  of  great  care  in  this  respect. 

In  every  case  of  delirium  tremens  the  nourishment  of  the  patient 
is  of  primary  importance,  and  efforts  must  be  made  to  induce  him 
to  take  food  as  soon  as  possible.     The  condition  of  the  digestive 


ALCOHOLISM  AND  DELIRIUM  TREMENS.  409 

organs  will  usually  prevent  the  use  of  a  solid  diet,  but  with  some 
degree  of  persuasion  small  quantities  of  strong  beef -tea  may  be  taken 
at  frequent  short  intervals,  or  the  beef-tea  may  be  taken  alternately 
with  small  quantities  of  milk.  Until  this  liquid  food  can  be  digested 
without  trouble  no  effort  should  be  made  to  employ  solids. 

In  every  case  the  question  of  the  administration  of  alcohol  will 
have  to  be  considered.  I  am  convinced  that  although  for  their 
future  life  it  will  be  advisable  for  these  patients  to  become  total 
abstainers,  yet  during  the  time  of  the  attack  there  is  often  consider- 
able advantage  in  the  use  of  moderate  quantities  of  the  accustomed 
form  of  stimulant,  especially  if  this  stimulant  can  be  used  as  a  bribe 
to  induce  the  patient  to  take  food.  Frequently  the  prospect  of  the 
stimulant  will  facilitate  the  administration  of  food.  In  patients  of 
advanced  years  the  use  of  alcohol  is  imperative,  especially  when  there 
is  much  sleeplessness.  The  whole  difficulty  consists  in  tiding  over 
the  risks  of  the  first  three  or  four  days,  and  there  is  no  evidence  that 
these  risks  are  increased  by  the  administration  of  alcohol ;  while, 
on  the  other  hand,  particularly  when  the  condition  is  complicated 
with  pneumonia  and  with  sleeplessness,  there  is  considerable  evidence 
to  show  that  alcohol  is  beneficial.  The  amount  given  need  not,  as  a 
rule,  be  large,  but  the  quantity  must  be  regulated  by  the  condition 
of  the  pulse,  by  the  degree  of  improvement  that  occurs  after  alcohol 
has  been  given,  and  by  the  severity  of  other  symptoms.  When  the 
pulse  is  weak  and  fluttering,  and  the  sounds  of  the  heart  are  indis- 
tinct— in  fact,  when  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  patient  is  the 
subject  of  fatty  degeneration  of  the  muscular  walls  of  the  heart — 
stimulants  will  generally  be  absolutely  necessary,  and  to  withhold 
them  because  this  affection  is  assumed  to  have  its  origin  in  the  con- 
sumption of  an.  excess  of  alcohol  is  to  misunderstand  the  true  causa- 
tion of  this  disease. 

The  medicinal  treatment  of  this  condition  is  mainly  guided  by 
the  desire  to  promote  quiet  and  to  produce  sleep,  and  with  these 
objects  hypnotics  and  other  remedies  maybe  given.  In  mild  attacks 
of  delirium  tremens  no  medication  may  be  needed  beyond,  perhaps, 
the  administration  of  a  saline  purgative,  the  need  of  which  is  suffi- 
ciently indicated  by  the  furred  condition  of  the  tongue.  When  a 
hypnotic  is  advisable,  considerable  caution  must  be  exercised  in  the 
selection,  since  many  of  the  hypnotics  more  commonly  employed 
under  other  conditions  are  distinctly  contraindicated  by  one  or  other 
of  the  diseases  which  are  so  frequently  associated  with  delirium 


410  NERVOUS  DISEASES. 

tremens ;  thus,  for  example,  the  use  of  opium  is  often  to  be  avoided 
on  account  of  the  coexistence  of  renal  changes.  Should  there  be 
any  albumin  in  the  urine  it  will  be  unwise  to  use  opium  or  morphine, 
or  any  derivatives  of  these  drugs.  The  albuminuria,  it  is  true,  may 
be  only  symptomatic  of  the  mild  febrile  condition  which  so  frequently 
occurs  with  delirium  tremens,  or  it  may  be  a  mere  side  phenomenon 
of  pneumonia  should  this  complication  be  present,  but  the  risks  of 
the  existence  of  chronic  kidney  disease  are  very  great.  Another 
reason  against  the  use  of  opium  in  the  solid  form  lies  in  the  imper- 
fect work  which  the  stomach  is  capable  of  performing  at  the  onset 
of  an  attack  ;  hence,  if  repeated  small  doses  of  solid  opium  are  given 
to  procure  sleep  or  allay  restlessness,  these  may  remain  unabsorbed 
for  some  time,  and  may  constitute  a  source  of  danger. 

Chloral  is  frequently  recommended  for  administration  at  night, 
but  the  objection  to  the  use  of  this  remedy  lies  in  its  depressant 
influence  upon  the  circulation,  which  constitutes  a  real  danger  when 
dealing  with  an  old  debilitated  patient  with  a  weak  heart.  In  judi- 
ciously selected  cases,  however,  it  may  be  of  some  service,  but  it 
should  be  used  only  in  moderate  dose,  and  its  influence  upon  the 
pulse  should  be  carefully  noted. 

Hyoscine  is  less  objectionable  than  either  of  these.  The  hydro- 
bromate  maybe  administered  in  doses  of  from  2-g-Q-  to  y^-g-  of  a  grain 
by  hypodermatic  injection.  The  influence  upon  the  pulse  is,  in  gen- 
eral, not  very  marked,  and  the  sleep  which  ensues  after  its  adminis- 
tration may  be  disturbed  by  dreams,  but  usually  there  is  considerable 
muscular  relaxation  and  marked  diminution  in  the  restless  move- 
ments and  tremor. 

Of  the  other  hypnotics,  paraldehyde  and  sulphonal  appear  to  give 
the  best  results,  and  to  be  free  from  the  objections  already  urged 
against  the  use  of  chloral  or  of  opium.  Potassium  bromide  or  am- 
monium bromide  may  be  employed  with  comparative  safety  in  young 
adults,  and  may  also  be  used  in  moderate  doses  during  the  day  to 
quiet  excitability ;  larger  doses  may  be  given  at  night-time  to  pro- 
mote sleep.  Neither  of  these  drugs  should,  however,  be  used  for 
old  patients  with  weak  circulation. 

Very  considerable  doses  of  digitalis  have  been  recommended  in 
the  treatment  of  delirium  tremens,  and  although  this  drug  is  not 
always  beneficial  in  this  condition,  yet  it  appears  to  possess  some 
value  v»^hen  the  delirium  is  associated  with  low  arterial  tension. 
The  administration  of  digitalis  should  be  checked  so  soon  as  the 


APOPLEXY.  411 

pulse  regains  normal  tension,  and  the  heroic  doses  recommended  by 
Mr.  Jones,  of  Jersey,  do  not  appear  to  have  been  very  frequently 
employed  by  practitioners  in  England  or  in  America.  When  there  are 
indications  of  cardiac  failure,  strychnine  should  be  given  hypoder- 
matically,  and,  if  necessary,  may  be  followed  by  the  administration 
of  tincture  of  nux  vomica  in  repeated  small  doses  by  the  mouth. 

Weakness  of  the  pulse  may  also  be  dealt  with  by  the  use  of 
aromatic  spirit  of  ammonia  in  conjunction  with  alcohol  or  with  ether. 

Apoplexy.  Apoplexy  is  a  somewhat  broad  term  which  is  used 
to  designate  the  conditions  resulting  from  sudden  hemorrhage,  or 
from  sudden  occlusion  by  means  of  an  embolus,  of  one  of  the  cere- 
bral vessels.  When  a  vessel  of  large  size  is  obstructed  by  an  em- 
bolus the  chief  symptoms  agree  closely  with  those  which  result  from 
hemorrhage  from  a  vessel  of  corresponding  size,  and  since  the  treat- 
ment is  practically  the  same  under  both  conditions,  it  is  perhaps 
<3onvenient  to  consider  the  subject  under  the  somewhat  vague  term 
of  apoplexy,  instead  of  attempting  to  differentiate  cerebral  hemor- 
rhage from  cerebral  embolism  and  to  describe  the  treatment  of  these 
conditions  separately. 

For  practical  purposes,  whenever  unconsciousness  combined  with 
paralysis  occurs  suddenly^  it  will  be  safe  to  assume  hemorrhage  and 
to  treat  accordingly.  The  chief  indication  is  to  adopt  measures 
calculated  to  diminish  the  risks  of  further  hemorrhagic  effusion. 
These  risks  will  obviously  be  increased  by  any  movements  of  the 
patient  involving  strain  upon  the  circulatory  system,  and  accord- 
ingly it  is  desirable  to  avoid  all  unnecessary  movements,  and,  when 
the  attack  occurs  in  a  private  house,  arrangements  should  be  made 
for  putting  the  patient  to  bed  in  the  room  in  which  he  has  fallen 
unconscious. 

The  bed  should  be  arranged  so  that  the  head  is  somewhat  high, 
and  the  danger  of  further  effusion  should  be  diminished,  so  far  as 
possible,  by  diversion  of  the  blood-current  to  the  extremities,  more 
particularly  to  the  feet ;  this  may  be  effected  by  warmth  applied  by 
means  of  hot-water  bottles  carefully  protected  with  blankets,  or  by 
the  use  of  hot  mustard  plasters,  or,  if  it  can  be  conveniently  arranged, 
by  allowing  the  feet  to  hang  over  the  bed  in  a  warm  bath,  to  which 
mustard  may  be  added  with  advantage.  Frequently,  however,  the 
adoption  of  such  measures  will  involve  an  amount  of  movement 
that  appears  undesirable,  and  the  practitioner  must  be  content  with 
seeing  that  the  patient  is  placed  in  a  position  of  comfort  in  bed. 


41 2  NEB  VO  US  DISEASES. 

lying  on  his  back,  with  the  head  turned  toward  one  side,  so  as  to 
avoid  as  far  as  possible  any  obstruction  to  respiration  from  the  par- 
alysis of  the  tongue,  or  from  accumulations  of  mucus  within  the 
pharynx,  and  with  hot-water  bottles  at  the  foot  of  the  bed,  as 
already  mentioned. 

When  the  head  appears  hot,  cold  applications  may  be  used. 
Evaporating  lotions  may  be  applied  upon  lint  over  the  forehead,, 
or  an  ice  bag  may  be  found  to  be  more  convenient  and  to  require 
less  frequent  change.  With  stout,  plethoric  individuals  venesection 
is  often  recommended  with  the  view  of  reducing  the  blood-pressure, 
and  thus  diminishing  the  risks  of  further  hemorrhage.  To  be  of 
any  service  the  amount  of  blood  removed  must  be  from  15  to  20 
ounces.  It  is  perfectly  useless  to  apply  leeches  in  the  neighborhood 
of  the  head  and  to  attempt  thus  to  control  cerebral  hemorrhage  by 
abstracting  blood. 

It  is  necessary  from  the  commencement  of  treatment  to  issue 
warnings  against  all  attempts  to  rouse  the  unconscious  patient,^ 
either  with  the  view  of  obtaining  answers  to  questions  or  of  his 
making  muscular  demonstrations  of  consciousness,  and  it  is  further 
necessary  to  give  a  word  of  warning  against  the  employment  of 
stimulants  throughout  the  course  of  this  disease.  Unfortunately  the 
natural  tendency  of  the  uneducated  is  to  treat  all  forms  of  uncon- 
sciousness as  though  they  depended  on  fainting,  and  to  employ  stim- 
ulants in  order  to  promote  circulation — a  course  which  would  be 
extremely  disastrous  in  connection  with  cerebral  hemorrhage. 

To  reduce  the  blood-pressure  still  further  it  is  commonly  desirable 
to  employ  a  purgative  of  rapid  action  and  small  dose,  which  may 
be  used  with  comparative  facility  in  a  condition  of  unconsciousness. 
These  qualities  are  to  be  found  in  croton  oil  and  also  in  calomel. 
The  former  may  be  employed  in  doses  of  from  f  to  1  minim,  and 
for  facility  of  introducing  the  smaller  dose  it  should  be  mixed  with 
a  few  drops  of  olive  oil  or  castor  oil.  The  dose  may  then  be  placed 
upon  the  tongue,  and  owing  to  its  passage  onward  during  the  uncon- 
scious movements  of  tongue  and  mouth  the  action  is  commonly 
fairly  prompt.  If  more  convenient,  however,  4  or  5  grains  of  cal- 
omel may  similarly  be  placed  upon  the  tongue,  but  unless  the  tongue 
is  previously  slightly  moistened  much  of  the  powder  may  be  lost 
during  the  exaggerated  movements  of  respiration. 

More  active  cardiac  depressants  are  sometimes  recommended,  such 
as  tincture  of  aconite  or  the  tincture  of  veratrum  viride  of  the  United 


APOPLEXY.  413 

States  Pharmacopoeia,  which  may  both  be  given  in  repeated  doses  of 
from  1  to  2  minims  ;  the  latter,  however,  occasionally  produces  such 
severe  symptoms  that  it  has  been  deleted  from  the  British  Pharma- 
Gopoeia.  In  America  it  is  comparatively  rarely  that  either  of  these 
drugs  is  employed  at  the  onset  of  an  attack  of  apoplexy.  Indeed, 
the  whole  treatment  of  cerebral  hemorrhage  at  this  early  stage  is 
generally  limited  to  careful  nursing,  the  prevention  of  any  constric- 
tion about  the  neck  and  the  maintenance  of  perfect  quiet.  Later, 
it  will  be  necessary  to  relieve  the  dryness  of  the  mouth  either  by 
moistening  the  lips  and  tongue  from  time  to  time  with  water  or 
with  dilute  glycerin  or  by  spraying  the  mouth  with  liquid  paraffin. 

So  long  as  the  patient  remains  unconscious  it  is  inadvisable  to 
a,ttempt  to  feed  by  the  mouth,  and  it  is  accordingly  necessary  to 
employ  nutrient  enemata  in  small  quantities  from  time  to  time 
should  the  period  of  unconsciousness  be  prolonged.  After  the 
power  of  swallowing  has  been  regained  the  diet  should  be  given 
in  liquid  form  and  in  small  bulk,  and  even  after  complete  restora- 
tion of  consciousness,  solid  food,  especially  animal  food,  must  still 
be  avoided,  since  it  might  lead  to  constipation,  and  thus  throw  a 
strain  upon  the  cerebral  vessels. 

With  regard  to  medicinal  treatment  after  consciousness  has  been 
sufficiently  restored  to  allow  of  administration  by  the  mouth,  the 
remedies  employed  must  be  selected  with  the  view  of  quieting  the 
circulation  and  favoring  the  absorption  of  effused  blood.  With 
these  objects  it  is  customary  to  administer  minim  doses  of  tincture 
of  aconite  with  potassium  bromide  or  ammonium  bromide,  together 
with  gradually  increasing  doses  of  potassium  iodide.  These  drugs 
may  be  given  frequently  during  the  day,  or  the  bromide  may  be 
reserved  for  employment  at  night  should  sleeplessness  form  a  prom- 
inent symptom.  Ordinarily,  however,  the  repeated  administration 
of  bromide  is  of  great  advantage  in  reducing  the  mental  excitement 
and  emotional  conditions  which  are  so  often  developed  during  the 
gradual  restoration  of  the  mental  powers. 

When  there  is  evidence  of  the  existence  of  syphilis,  and  the  origin 
of  the  hemorrhage  or  embolism  has  accordingly  been  referred  to 
syphilitic  changes  in  the  cerebral  arteries,  mercurial  ointment  may 
be  used  until  mild  symptoms  of  salivation  have  been  produced  ; 
the  solution  of  the  perchloride  may  also  be  employed  with  the  same 
limitation.  In  these  cases,  moreover,  potassium  iodide  also  appears 
to  be  of  the  greatest  service,  although  its  utility  in  favoring  the 


414  NERVOUS  DISEASES. 

absorption  of  the  clot  is  by  no  means  confined  to  cases  with  a  history 
of  syphilitic  tamt. 

Some  degree  of  muscular  degeneration  commonly  follows  an 
attack  of  apoplexy,  and  appears  to  indicate  the  desirability  of 
adopting  measures  to  maintain  muscular  contractility.  No  such 
treatment  should,  however,  be  employed  so  long  as  the  tempera- 
ture, the  complaints  of  pain,  or  movements  indicative  of  pain,  point 
to  the  existence  of  any  cerebral  irritation,  and  indeed  it  is  advisable 
to  defer  passive  movements,  friction  of  the  affected  limbs,  and  mas- 
sage until  some  weeks  have  elapsed  after  the  original  hemorrhage. 
Meanwhile,  however,  should  the  fingers  on  the  affected  side  of  the 
body  show  a  tendency  to  contraction,  passive  movements  will  be  of 
service,  and  mild  electric  currents  may  be  used  to  the  extensor 
muscles.  These  measures  are  of  greatest  service  when  the  muscles 
show  but  little  sign  of  wasting,  and  under  their  influence  the  tem- 
perature on  the  affected  side  may  gradually  be  restored  to  the  nor- 
mal. A  weak,  continuous  current  usually  gives  better  results  than 
are  obtainable  from  faradic  stimulation. 

The  occurrence  of  one  attack  of  apoplexy  always  calls  for  the 
adoption  of  precautions  calculated  to  prevent  a  recurrence.  Prima- 
rily, all  emotional  excitement  and  also  violent  exertion  should  be 
avoided.  The  diet  will  require  considerable  care,  so  as  to  be  nutri- 
tious without  being  constipating,  and  all  forms  of  indulgence,  both 
in  eating  and  drinking,  should  be  forbidden.  Frequently  the  occa- 
sional use  of  mild  purgatives  or  laxatives  will  be  beneficial. 

When  any  disease  marked  by  the  presence  of  high  tension  exists 
— such  as  chronic  nephritis,  cirrhosis  of  the  kidney,  or  heart  disease 
— the  tension  may  be  relieved  by  the  frequent  use  of  small  doses 
either  of  nitroglycerin  or  of  erythrol  tetranitrate.  These  drugs 
must,  however,  be  employed  with  considerable  caution,  since  many 
observers  maintain  that  the  attendant  degenerative  arterial  changes 
render  relaxation  of  the  arterioles  a  somewhat  dangerous  proceeding, 
since  although  the  pressure  may  be  relieved  in  the  arteries  it  is  in 
all  probability  somewhat  raised  within  the  capillaries,  which  may 
favor  further  hemorrhage. 

It  has  been  suggested  that  when  there  is  evidence  of  marked  arte- 
rial degeneration  the  liability  to  further  hemorrhage  might  be  dimin- 
ished by  the  adoption  of  surgical  measures,  such  as  ligature  of  the 
common  carotid  on  the  affected  side,  and  proposals  have  frequently 
been  made  to  trephine  and  remove  blood  resulting  from  effusion 


i 


MENINGITIS.  415 

after  the  initial  shock  of  apoplexy  has  passed  off.  Both  of  these 
operations,  however,  involve  considerable  risks,  and  cannot  be  ade- 
quately considered  in  this  place. 

Meningitis.  Acute  inflammation  of  the  meninges  occurs  in  con- 
nection with  several  different  diseases.  It  may  be  secondary  to  some 
disease  of  bone,  more  particularly  to  disease  of  the  petrous  portion 
of  the  temporal  bone,  or  it  may  ensue  in  the  course  of  one  of  the 
infectious  fevers,  or  in  connection  with  syphilis  or  ulcerative  endo- 
carditis, while  a  special  variety  of  meningitis  has  been  recognized 
under  the  name  of  "tubercular  meningitis" — a  name  which  suffi- 
ciently indicates  the  dependence  of  the  condition  upon  tubercular 
changes  primarily  affecting  the  vessels  and  secondarily  leading  to 
inflammatory  changes  and  accumulation  of  fluid  within  the  men- 
inges and  within  the  ventricles. 

The  treatment  of  meningitis  must  to  a  very  great  extent  depend 
upon  the  estimate  that  is  formed  of  its  cause ;  but  there  are  some 
features  in  the  treatment  that  are  common  to  all  types  of  menin- 
gitis, and  it  is,  therefore,  convenient  to  deal  with  these  general  con- 
ditions collectively,  leaving  the  differentiation  of  the  treatment  for 
separate  consideration. 

In  all  forms  of  cerebral  meningitis  the  first  essential  is  to  secure 
rest  and  quiet.  The  patient  must  be  kept  in  bed,  with  the  head 
slightly  raised.  It  is  frequently  advisable  to  cut  the  hair  short  in 
an  early  stage  of  the  disease  in  order  to  facilitate  the  subsequent 
application  of  ice  bags  or  other  local  forms  of  treatment.  The  room 
should  be  moderately  darkened,  since  frequently  a  bright  light  appears 
to  be  sufficient  to  produce  pain.  The  head  of  the  bed  should  be 
arranged  so  as  not  to  face  the  window,  while  the  bed,  as  in  other 
febrile  conditions,  should  be  moderately  narrow,  fairly  low,  and 
placed  so  that  the  nurse  can  readily  approach  either  side. 

At  the  commencement  of  the  treatment,  even  in  cases  of  doubt, 
purgatives  should  be  employed,  since  with  their  administration  it  is 
often  found  that  the  headache  becomes  less  intense.  The  selection  of 
a  purgative  should  be  guided  by  the  desire  to  obtain  a  fairly  prompt 
evacuation  without  continuous  irritation  and  disturbance.  These 
objects  may  generally  be  secured  by  the  employment  of  some  mer- 
curial, such  as  gray  powder,  blue  pill,  or  calomel,  given  at  night  in 
dose  adapted  to  the  age  of  the  individual,  and  followed  in  the  morning 
by  a  brisk  saline  purgative,  preferably  of  an  effervescent  character, 
which  may  ordinarily  be  trusted  to  secure  one  thorough  evacuation. 


416  NERVOUS  DISEASES. 

The  diet  in  meningitis  is,  to  some  extent,  regulated  by  tlie  degree 
of  fever.  It  should,  as  a  rule,  be  of  light,  nutritious  character,  and 
frequently  it  will  be  found  that  the  tendency  to  sickness  will  neces- 
sitate the  use  of  iced  milk  in  repeated  small  quantities. 

Pain  may  sometimes  be  controlled  by  the  application  of  cold  to 
the  scalp,  and  for  this  purpose  Leiter's  tubes  may  be  employed  if 
available,  or  an  ice  bag  containing  small  fragments  of  pounded  ice 
may  be  used,  or,  if  ice  cannot  be  obtained,  the  pain  may  sometimes 
be  relieved  to  some  extent  by  evaporating  lotions.  These  cooling 
applications  serve  not  only  to  reduce  pain,  but  frequently  to  diminish 
excitability  and  to  favor  sleep.  When  the  onset  is  very  acute  and 
the  pain  intense,  some  relief,  particularly  in  traumatic  conditions, 
occasionally  follows  the  application  of  leeches  in  the  neighborhood 
of  the  painful  part. 

The  further  treatment  of  meningitis  must  to  a  large  extent  be 
symptomatic,  though  in  every  type  of  the  disease  it  is  advisable  to 
commence  with  comparatively  large  doses  either  of  potassium  iodide 
or  of  mercury,  and  this  form  of  general  treatment  is  perhaps  most 
imperative  in  dealing  with  tubercular  meningitis. 

The  chief  symptoms  demanding  treatment  are  vomiting,  consti- 
pation, excessive  fever  and  sleeplessness,  with  other  indications  of 
cerebral  excitement.  These  may  be  dealt  with  as  they  arise  ;  vom- 
iting by  the  employment  of  iced  food,  the  use  of  small  fragments 
of  ice,  and  the  administration  of  a  gastric  sedative,  such  as  diluted 
hydrocyanic  acid. 

In  general,  however,  gastric  sedatives  are  of  comparatively  little 
service,  since  the  vomiting  is  the  result  of  central  rather  than  of  any 
form  of  gastric  irritation. 

Constipation  may  sometimes  be  controlled  by  enemata,  and  in 
general  it  will  be  found  that  an  enema  of  glycerin,  or  a  glycerin 
suppositoiy,  will  give  more  satisfactory  results  than  are  obtainable 
from  the  use  of  larger  simple  enemata.  Should  the  constipation  be 
severe,  it  may  be  necessary  to  employ  gray  powder  or  blue  pill,  in 
purgative  dose,  or  to  administer  magnesium  sulphate.  The  last- 
mentioned  drug  is,  however,  generally  avoided,  since  when  it  fails 
to  act  it  may  give  rise  to  additional  trouble  by  the  formation  of 
concretions. 

The  febrile  condition  may  be  reduced  by  tepid  sponging,  or  in 
extreme  cases  by  the  cold  bath ;  but  the  antipyretic  remedies,  such 
as  antipyrine  and  antifebrine,  are  better  either  avoided,  since  they 


TUBERCULAR  MENINGITIS.  417 

may  cause  considerable  depression,  or  given  in  very  small  doses, 
when  they  may  be  of  some  service  in  relieving  pain. 

Sleeplessness  may  occasionally  be  controlled  by  cold  applications 
to  the  head ;  but  when  these  fail  some  form  of  bromide,  preferably 
the  ammonium  bromide,  may  be  given,  and,  if  the  pulse  permits, 
chloral  hydrate  may  be  added.  The  propriety  of  employing  opium 
or  morphine  in  these  cases  must  be  determined  by  the  age  of  the 
patient  as  well  as  by  the  cause  of  meningitis.  In  the  more  common 
forms  of  cerebral  meningitis  which  occur  in  children  in  connection 
with  bone  disease,  or  with  the  exanthemata,  the  administration  of 
morphine  and  opium  must  be  deprecated,  since  these  drugs  are  not 
well  tolerated,  and  they  also  serve  to  favor  constipation. 

If  the  cerebral  excitement  is  associated  with  rise  of  temperature, 
and  perhaps  with  vomiting,  great  amelioration  may  ensue  after  the 
use  of  stimulants,  which  under  such  circumstances  are  further  indi- 
cated by  the  rapidity  and  weakness  of  the  pulse.  It  is  also  occa- 
sionally found  that  in  these  conditions  moderate  doses  of  antipyrine 
or  of  antif ebrine  will  allay  pain  and  excitement,  and  for  this  pur- 
pose their  employment  is  justifiable,  although  the  dose  should  not 
be  large  enough  to  influence  the  temperature. 

With  regard  to  the  special  treatment  of  the  different  forms  of 
meningitis,  cerebral  meningitis  dependent  upon  diseased  bone  neces- 
sitates the  adoption  of  surgical  measures,  and  these  may  range  from 
simple  incisions  over  the  mastoids  to  operations  as  formidable  as  the 
opening  of  the  lateral  sinuses  and  the  removal  possibly  of  infective 
coagula.  When  the  meningitis  results  from  injury  and  there  is  a 
suspicion  of  irritation  due  to  fracture,  surgical  aid  will  again  be 
called  for,  but  when  the  disease  arises  in  connection  with  the  exan- 
themata, or  with  other  infective  processes,  little  can  be  done  beyond 
the  adoption  of  symptomatic  treatment  and  the  empL  .yment  of  potas- 
sium iodide  and  mercury,  as  already  indicated. 

Tubercular  Meningitis.  Tubercular  meningitis  is  such  a  serious 
form  of  disease  that  it  demands  separate  mention,  even  though  the 
treatment  offers  very  little  hope.  The  chief  difficulties  in  connec- 
tion with  tubercular  meningitis  lie  in  the  diagnosis  and  in  the  fre- 
quency with  which  fallacious  hopeful  indications  form  a  prelude  to 
a  sudden  increase  in  the  severity  of  the  case.  It  is  by  no  means 
uncommon  for  the  course  of  this  disease  to  present  considerable  im- 
provement, which  may  be  separated  by  only  a  short  interval  from 
the  fatal  termination,  and  it  is,  therefore,  necessary  to  be  on  one's 

27 


418  NERVOUS  DISEASES. 

guard  against  being  misled  into  giving  a  cheering  prognosis  should 
such  signs  of  improvement  arise. 

The  treatment  of  tubercular  meningitis  is  very  hopeless,  and 
although  cases  of  supposed  recovery  have  been  recorded  from  time 
to  time,  and  must  have  occurred  within  the  experience  of  most  prac- 
titioners, the  recovery  has  sometimes  thrown  some  doubt  upon  the 
original  diagnosis,  while  in  other  cases  it  has  been  but  partial.  I 
have  on  more  than  one  occasion,  at  the  Evelina  Hospital,  felt  con- 
fident of  the  diagnosis,  and,  with  the  prolonged  use  of  potassium 
iodide  or  of  mercury,  have  found  that  although  death  has  not  re- 
sulted, the  child  has  recovered  either  with  loss  of  sight  alone,  or 
with  loss  of  sight  together  with  considerable  impairment  or  total 
loss  of  mental  power.  The  complete  recoveries  that  have  been 
occasionally  mentioned,  and  of  which  I  have  seen  instances,  have 
left  much  doubt  in  my  own  mind  as  to  the  original  diagnosis,  even 
though  paralytic  symptoms,  squinting,  and  optic  neuritis  may  have 
been  present. 

The  treatment  of  tubercular  meningitis  must  be  mainly  symp- 
tomatic, and  the  symptoms  calling  for  treatment  are  the  same  as 
those  already  detailed  in  connection  with  cerebral  meningitis ;  but 
with  tubercular  meningitis  I  am  in  the  habit  of  using  large  doses 
of  potassium  iodide  from  the  commencement  of  the  treatment,  even 
though  the  explanation  of  any  benefits  resulting  therefrom  may  be 
as  uncertain  as  the  benefits  themselves.  The  iodide  is  used  for  its 
power  of  controlling  the  growth  of  small  cells,  which  form  the  funda- 
mental pathological  change  in  this  disease,  and  not  with  any  reference 
to  the  value  of  the  drug  as  an  antisyphilitic,  still  less  with  any  idea 
that  tubercular  meningitis  is  of  syphilitic  origin. 

Recently  attempts  have  been  made  to  treat  this  disease  by  surgical 
measures,  such  as  the  removal  of  fluid  from  the  ventricles,  but  the 
results  of  this  treatment  hitherto  have  not  been  encouraging. 


CHAPTEH   XVIII. 

SPECIFIC  INFECTIOUS  DISEASES. 

General  Management  of  Specific  Infectious  Diseases — Smallpox  (  Variola) — Chicken- 
pox  {  Varicella)  -  Scarlet  Fever  [Scarlatina) — Measles  [Morhilli) — German 
Measles  {Eolheln  or  Rubeola) — Mumps  {Epidemic  Parotitis) — Whooping-cough 

{Pertussis). 

General  Management  of  Specific  Infectious  Diseases.  Al- 
though it  will  be  necessary  to  point  out  essential  differences  in  the 
treatment  of  the  various  eruptive  fevers,  it  will  save  repetition  to 
indicate  generally  the  points  of  management  which  hold  good  for 
the  chief  of  these  diseases — namely,  smallpox,  scarlet  fever,  and 
measles.  To  some  extent  the  precautions  that  are  necessary  when 
dealing  with  these  diseases  have  to  be  followed  also  in  others,  such 
as  typhoid,  typhus,  and  whooping-cough,  but  what  is  said  in  the 
present  section  applies  principally  to  the  first  group  of  diseases 
above  mentioned. 

The  first  consideration  is  naturally  the  selection  of  the  room  in 
which  the  patient  is  to  pass  the  infective  stage  of  the  disease,  so  as 
to  minimize  the  risks  of  the  spread  of  the  disease  to  other  inmates 
of  the  house  and  also  to  favor  the  well-being  of  the  patient.  When- 
ever possible,  the  room  selected  should  be  at  the  upper  part  of  the 
house,  and  preferably  at  the  top,  for  although  this  will  necessarily 
involve  some  additional  trouble  of  service,  it  will  insure  ventilation, 
and  it  will  favor  the  exclusion  from  the  sick-room  of  those  who  are 
not  actively  engaged  in  connection  with  the  patient.  When  possible, 
it  is  better  to  select  a  room  on  the  sunny  side  of  the  house,  since 
convalescence  is  rendered  less  tedious  by  the  brightness  and  light, 
which  also  serve  the  additional  purpose  of  favoring  cleanliness  and 
ventilation.  In  severe  cases,  should  the  arrangement  of  the  house 
permit,  it  will  be  of  great  service  to  isolate  adjacent  rooms  for  the 
use  of  the  nurses. 

The  amount  of  light  that  is  to  be  permitted  in  the  sick-room  will 
to  some  extent  vary  with  the  nature  of  the  disease,  though  it  is  very 
rarely  necessary  to  completely  cut  off  the  light,  even  during  the 
acute  stage.    Sometimes  at  the  beginning  of  measles  the  light  appears 


420  SPEOIFIC  INFEGTIO  US  DISEASES. 

to  cause  some  discomfort,  especially  if  the  head  of  the  bed  faces  the 
window,  but  by  altering  the  position  of  the  bed,  or  by  using  a  thin 
green  blind,  this  complaint  may  be  obviated.  Similarly  during  the 
early  stage  of  typhoid  fever,  when  the  headache  is  severe,  some 
relief  may  be  obtained  by  partly  obscuring  the  light ;  and  similar 
measures  may  be  required  in  the  course  of  smallpox  when  there  is 
any  ulceration  of  the  cornea,  though  in  this  condition  it  is  perhaps 
better  to  employ  a  shade  for  the  eyes  than  to  darken  the  room. 

The  temperature  of  the  room  should  be  rendered  as  even  as  pos- 
sible, consistently  with  efficient  ventilation.  The  temperature  should 
not  exceed  from  60°  to  65°  F.,  unless  perhaps  in  the  event  of  the 
development  of  pulmonary  complications.  To  maintain  this  tem- 
perature and  to  insure  sufficient  ventilation,  it  is  desirable  to  have  a 
fire  burning  brightly  in  the  sick-room,  employing  screens,  if  neces- 
sary, to  prevent  the  air  of  the  room  from  becoming  unduly  heated. 
Apart  from  its  value  for  purposes  of  ventilation,  the  fire  will  be 
extremely  useful,  not  only  in  warming  nourishment  for  the  patient, 
but  also  in  affording  a  convenient  mode  of  disposing  of  scraps  of 
linen  or  lint  that  may  have  been  used  for  the  patient,  and  thereby 
have  been  infected,  together  with  any  flowers  that  have  faded. 

In  preparing  the  room  before  its  occupation  by  the  patient,  all 
unnecessary  articles  of  furniture  should  be  removed,  together  with 
all  carpets,  curtains,  and  other  hangings  which  might  afford  a  lodge- 
ment for  infective  particles,  and  thus  favor  the  spread  of  the  disease 
even  after  the  patient  has  become  convalescent.  With  this  object 
also  pictures  should  be  taken  down  or  at  least  replaced  by  unf ramed 
pictures  of  small  value,  which  may  be  readily  burned  after  the  ill- 
ness is  over.  The  carpet  may  be  replaced,  if  desired,  by  floorcloth 
or  linoleum,  which  can  be  readily  disinfected ;  but  in  general  it  is 
better  that  the  boards  of  the  floor  of  the  room  occupied  by  a  patient 
suffering  from  an  infectious  disease  should  be  left  bare. 

When  possible,  the  bed  should  be  metal,  in  preference  to  wood,  and 
should  be  provided  with  a  light  spring  mattress ;  and  it  should  be 
somewhat  narrow,  so  as  to  facilitate  the  necessary  nursing  opera- 
tions. It  is  often  recommended,  and  when  space  permits  it  is  of 
extreme  service,  to  have  two  beds  of  similar  size  and  height,  so  as 
to  permit  the  patient  to  be  moved  from  one  to  the  other  if  the 
malady  is  not  severe  enough  to  preclude  movements ;  but  it  is  dis- 
tinctly undesirable  that  these  beds  should  be  in  different  rooms  and 
that  the  patient  should  be  moved  from  one  room  to  the  other. 


MANAGEMENT  OF  SPECIFIC  INFECTIOUS  BISEASES.      421 

A  thin,  hard,  hair  mattress  is  preferable  to  a  feather  bed,  since, 
although  the  latter  may  be  comfortable  when  the  bed  has  been  newly 
made,  it  is  apt  to  become  very  hot  and  unpleasant,  even  when  it 
does  not  form  ridges  or  lumps,  with  the  restless  movements  of  the 
patient.  The  bedclothes  should  be  only  moderately  warm,  since 
there  is  no  advantage  in  heaping  up  bedclothes,  particularly  during 
the  time  when  the  fever  is  high. 

In  every  severe  case  it  is  essential  to  secure  two  nurses,  one  for 
day  and  one  for  night  work,  and  they  should  be  intrusted  with  the 
care  of  the  temperature-chart.  They  should  record  accurately  peri- 
odic observations  of  temperature,  pulse,  and  other  conditions  affect- 
ing the  patient,  as,  for  example,  the  action  of  the  bowels,  the  amount 
of  water  passed,  the  quantity  of  food  taken,  together  with  the  times 
at  which  medicine  has  been  administered.  It  is  essential  in  every 
febrile  case  that  the  variations  of  temperature  should  be  carefully 
charted,  since  isolated  observations  of  temperature  are  of  compara- 
tively little  service,  and  the  course  of  the  disease  can  be  so  much 
better  appreciated  by  inspection  of  a  well-kept  chart. 

It  is  perhaps  unnecessary  to  impress  upon  trained  nurses  the  im- 
portance of  personal  disinfection  before  leaving  the  sick-room,  but 
when  a  relative  takes  some  part  in  the  nursing,  precise  instructions 
should  be  given  on  the  use  of  disinfectants,  and  on  the  adoption  of 
garments  which  have  not  been  kept  in  the  room,  before  passing 
through  the  house  for  necessary  out-door  exercise. 

The  isolation  of  the  sick-room  should  be  insured,  especially  when 
dealing  with  smallpox  or  scarlet  fever,  by  suspending  a  sheet  out- 
side the  door  and  moistening  this  frequently  with  a  solution  of 
formaldehyde  or  carbolic  acid.  It  is  also  advisable  to  have,  either 
within  the  sick-room  or  immediately  outside,  a  large  vessel  contain- 
ing some  strong  disinfectant  solution,  into  which  all  linen  garments, 
towels,  and  other  articles  should  be  immersed  before  being  sent  away 
to  be  washed. 

The  doctor  should  give  instructions  to  have  a  mackintosh  coat 
hung  outside  the  sick-room  for  his  own  use,  so  as  to  avoid  the  risk  of 
spreading  the  disease  after  the  necessary  manipulations  of  the  patient. 
This  coat  should  from  time  to  time  be  cleansed  by  being  sponged 
with  a  solution  of  carbolic  acid,  and  it  is  scarcely  necessary  to  add 
that  the  utmost  care  should  be  taken  in  disinfecting  the  hands. 

The  comfort  of  the  patient  will  be  largely  increased  by  sponging 
from  time  to  time  with  mild  disinfectant  solutions,  and  during  the 


422 


SPECIFIC  INFECTIO  US  DISEASES. 


stage  of  convalescence  after  scarlet  fever  or  smallpox  the  surface 
should  be  lubricated  with  a  solution  of  carbolic  acid  in  oil,  of  the 
strength  of  1  drachm  of  liquid  carbolic  acid  to  8  ounces  of  olive  oil. 
These  inunctions  diminish  the  risk  of  infection  during  the  stage  of 
desquamation. 

The  motions  should  be  received  in  a  bedpan  or  other  receptacle 
containing  a  small  quantity  of  disinfectant,  and  before  removal  from 
the  sick-room  should  be  completely  covered  with  disinfectant  solu- 
tion. The  above  indications  should  be  followed  in  every  infectious 
case,  though  some  slight  modifications  required  by  the  nature  of  the 
■disease  will  be  mentioned  in  dealing  with  the  separate  diseases. 

After  the  patient  has  become  so  far  convalescent  as  to  be  able  to 
change  his  quarters,  the  greatest  care  should  be  taken  in  disinfecting 
the  room,  either  by  chlorine,  formaldehyde,  or  by  sulphur.  In 
using  chlorine  the  vessel  containing  the  mixture  of  salt  and  sulphuric 
acid  should  be  placed  on  a  high  shelf,  so  as  to  allow  the  gas  to  diffuse 
thoroughly  through  the  room  ;  but  when  using  sulphur  the  basin  or 
brazier  in  which  the  burning  sulphur  is  placed  should  be  in  the  centre 
of  the  room,  and  the  doors  and  windows  should  be  closed  and  pasted 
up  before  the  sulphur  is  ignited.  After  allowing  some  hours  to  elapse 
the  doors  and  windows  should  be  thrown  wide  open  and  all  particles 
of  dust  should  be  carefully  collected  by  means  of  sponges  or  cloths 
which  have  been  dampened  in  strong  antiseptic  solutions.  These 
should  subsequently  be  immersed  in  boiling  water  or  burned,  and 
the  doors  should  be  repeatedly  washed  with  carbolic  soap. 

The  following  prescriptions  for  diaphoretic  and  saline  mixtures 
are  often  used  at  the  commencement  of  specific  infectious  diseases 
of  simple  type : 


R. — Potassii  citratis 

Spiritus  setheris  niti*osi  . 
Liquoris  ammonii  acetatis 
Aquse  camphorpe 

R .  — Liquoris  ammonii  acetatis 
Potassii  nitratis 
Spiritus  setheris  nitrosi  . 
Aquae     .... 

R. — Potassii  nitratis 

Spiritus  ffitheris  nitrosi  . 
Liquoris  ammonii  acetatis 
Aquse     .... 


ad 


ad 


ad 


3SS. 
3ss. 
3ij- 


3  "J 
gr.  X. 

3ss. 

gr.  vij. 

3SS. 

^SS. 


MANAGEMENT  OF  SPECIFIC  INFECTIOUS  DISEASES.      423 


R.— Spiritus  ammoniEe  aromatici 
Spiritus  setheris  nitrosi  . 
Liquoris  ammonii  acetatis 
Aquae     .... 

R .  — Magnesii  snlphatis 

Liquoris  ammonii  acetatis 
Acidi  citi'ici  . 
Aquae  destillatae 


R. 


-Sodii  bicarbonatis 
Sodii  tartratis 
Aquse 


H .  — Potassii  acetatis 

Potassii  bicarbonatis 
Potassii  nitratis 
Aquae 


R .  — Potassii  bicarbonatis 
Acidi  citrici   . 
Aquae     . 

(In  effervescence). 

R  .  — Potassii  bicarbonatis 

Aquse 

Acidi  citrici   . 

Aquae 
( Dissolve  and  mix. ) 


s.  ad 


ITLxv. 

3SS. 


3J- 

^ss. 


s.  ad     Ij. 


gr.  X. 

ST.   XX. 


gr.  X. 


gr.  V. 

gr.  XX. 
gr.  XV. 


gr.  xxij. 
gr.  XV. 


It  will  perhaps  be  convenient  to  mention  here  that  great  strides 
have  been  made  during  the  last  few  years  in  what  has  been  termed 
the  antitoxin  treatment  of  various  specific  fevers.  This  term  is, 
however,  too  limited,  since  it  includes  two  distinct  classes  of  reme- 
dies, both  of  bacterial  origin,  which  are  being  employed  in  connec- 
tion with  these  specific  fevers. 

One  group,  which  has  collectively  been  termed  "vaccines,"  is 
used  to  confer  immunity.  It  has  been  found  that  to  some  extent 
individuals  who  have  been  inoculated  with  these  various  vaccines 
are  proof  against  the  subsequent  introduction  of  the  bacilli  upon 
which  the  specific  fevers  respectively  depend.  So  far  as  can  be 
estimated  at  present,  the  prophylactic  action  of  the  vaccines  is  more 
persistent  than  that  of  the  antitoxins.  The  vaccines  that  have  been 
employed  are  for  cholera,  for  typhoid,  and  for  plague,  in  addition 
to  the  ordinary  vaccine  lymph,  which  is  familiar  as  a  protective 
against  smallpox.  The  second  group,  consisting  of  antitoxins,  is 
mainly  used  for  the  treatment  of  those  who  are  already  infected. 


424  SPECIFIC  INFECTIO  US  DISEASES. 

though  they  have  also  been  employed  as  prophylactics.  The  chief 
antitoxins  are  those  employed  for  diphtheria  and  tetanus.  The 
observations  as  to  the  value  of  antitoxins  are  far  more  numerous 
and  more  satisfactory  than  those  relating  to  the  vaccines,  since  it  is 
obviously  more  easy  to  estimate  the  action  obtained  in  controlling 
the  course  of  disease  than  to  be  certain  that  the  use  of  the  vaccine 
has  been  of  service  in  preventing  infection. 

With  the  exception  of  the  vaccine  for  smallpox,  it  is  extremely 
difficult  to  estimate  the  protective  action,  since  it  is  well  known 
that  in  times  of  epidemics  some  individuals  who  are  constantly 
exposed  to  infection  escape  without  the  development  of  a  single 
symptom.  It  is  only  when  large  bodies  qf  men  are  similarly  ex- 
posed to  infection,  and  when  large  sections  of  these  have  been 
treated  with  the  different  vaccines,  that  it  is  possible  to  obtain  an 
approximate  idea  of  the  protective  influence  of  the  vaccines  em- 
ployed. Notwithstanding  these  difficulties,  the  evidence  in  support 
of  the  protective  value  of  the  vaccines  employed  for  cholera,  for 
typhoid  fever,  and  for  plague  is  accumulating  rapidly.  These  in- 
oculations are  now  being  largely  employed  in  the  army,  and  the 
similarity  of  the  conditions  of  life,  both  of  the  inoculated  and  the 
uninoculated,  renders  the  observations  of  the  different  statistics  pecu- 
liarly valuable. 

Professor  A.  E.  Wright,  of  Netley,  in  an  official  document  on 
vaccination  against  typhoid  (enteric)  fever,  states  that  the  anti- 
typhoid inoculation  is  frequently  followed  by  constitutional  and  by 
local  symptoms,  the  latter  being  more  severe  when  the  former  are 
slight.  The  constitutional  symptoms  generally  include  a  tendency 
to  faintness  or  perhaps  collapse  within  the  first  few  hours,  which 
may  be  succeeded  by  a  rise  of  temperature,  which  rarely  exceeds 
101°  and  commonly  passes  off  within  eighteen  or  twenty-four  hours. 
The  local  symptoms  are  marked  by  tenderness  at  the  site  of  inocu- 
lation, which  generally  commences  within  five  to  six  hours,  and  may 
be  succeeded  by  redness,  either  limited  to  the  circumscribed  area 
around  the  site  of  inoculation  or  extending  in  lines  along  the  course 
of  the  lymphatics.  The  local  symptoms,  in  general,  pass  away 
within  forty-eight  hours.  The  tendency  to  collapse  or  faintness 
may  be  kept  in  check  by  enforced  rest  and  avoidance  of  alcohol, 
while  the  local  symptoms  may  be  relieved  by  the  use  of  hot-water 
stupes. 

It  is  sometimes  curious  to  note  that  experience  has  shown  that  the 


SMALLPOX.  425 

antityphoid  inoculations,  while  in  all  probability  they  will  not  aggra- 
vate, do  nothing  to  check  an  incipient  attack  of  typhoid  fever. 

The  position  of  the  preventive  inoculation  against  plague  rests 
upon  a  somewhat  more  certain  basis,  and  has  recently  formed  the 
subject  of  a  valuable  paper  by  W.  N.  Haffkine,  CLE./  who  finds 
that  from  very  accurate  data  collected  during  the  time  of  the  late 
epidemics,  the  mortality  among  the  inoculated  plague  cases  was  some 
50  per  cent,  lower  than  among  the  uninoculated,  and  he  believes 
that  the  duration  of  the  effect  of  the  plague  inoculation  lasts  at 
least  the  length  of  one  epidemic,  which  on  an  average  extends  from 
over  four  to  six  months  of  the  year  In  the  same  paper  some  valu- 
able remarks  are  also  made  concerning  anticholera  inoculation. 

The  use  of  antitoxins  in  the  treatment  of  diphtheria  and  of  tetanus 
will  be  dealt  with  more  fully  under  the  heading  of  these  diseases. 
These  antitoxins  are  employed  after  the  development  of  symptoms 
of  the  disease,  and  they  produce  certain  constitutional  and  local 
symptoms,  details  of  which  will  be  given  more  fully  hereafter. 

It  may  here  be  mentioned  that  other  antitoxins  are  frequently 
employed  for  other  diseases,  such  as  the  pneumococcus  antitoxin 
and  streptococcus  antitoxin,  while  Coley^s  fluid  has  been  used  with 
some  degree  of  success  in  the  treatment  of  malignant  growths,  and 
various  forms  of  Koch's  tuberculin  have  been  employed  in  that  of 
different  forms  of  tuberculosis. 

Smallpox  (  Variola).  It  is  not  necessary  in  these  pages  to  discuss 
the  infectious  character  of  this  disease,  which  is  well  recognized,  nor 
the  protective  value  of  vaccination.  At  the  outbreak  of  an  epidemic 
it  is  most  certainly  wise  for  all  those  to  be  revaccinated  who  are 
likely  to  be  brought  into  contact  with  those  suffering  from  this  dis- 
ease, while  those  who  have  already  had  this  misfortune  should 
undergo  a  period  of  isolation  and  quarantine  for  at  least  a  fortnight. 

There  is  some  evidence  to  show  that  vaccination  is  of  some  ser- 
vice even  during  the  stage  of  incubation,  for  although,  after  expo- 
sure to  infection,  vaccination  does  not  appear  to  be  protective,  it 
reduces  the  severity  of  the  attack. 

The  precautions  already  indicated  in  the  General  Management  of 
Specific  Infectious  Diseases  (see  p.  419)  should  be  rigidly  enforced 
in  connection  with  smallpox. 

It  is  sometimes  necessary  to  impregnate  the  atmosphere  of  the 

1  Lancet,  June  24,  1899. 


426  SPECIFIC  INFECTIO  US  DISEASES. 

sick-room  with  some  volatile  disinfectant,  since  this  disease  is  fre- 
quently accompanied  by  extremely  disagreeable  odors.  Of  the  dif- 
ferent disinfectants  eucalyptus  oil  is  perhaps  the  most  pleasant. 
Saucers  containing  sawdust  moistened  with  this  oil  may  be  placed 
in  various  parts  of  the  sick-room  ;  turpentine  or  camphor  may  some- 
times be  substituted,  while  in  extreme  cases  small  quantities  of  chlo- 
rine may  be  evolved  from  time  to  time.  The  last  remedy,  however, 
although  very  efficacious,  is  extremely  unpleasant  and  irritating  if 
employed  in  concentrated  form. 

The  treatment  of  smallpox  is  mainly  determined  by  the  predom- 
inance of  special  symptoms,  since,  apart  from  vaccination  and  from 
the  adoption  of  measures  to  diminish  the  risks  of  spread  of  this  dis- 
ease, we  are  not  acquainted  with  any  remedy  which,  like  antitoxin, 
would  antagonize  the  poison  and  shorten  the  duration  of  the  specific 
fever.  During  the  early  stage,  before  the  appearance  of  the  rash, 
the  prominent  symptoms  are  sickness,  severe  lumbar  pain,  and  rise 
of  temperature,  all  of  these  commencing  comparatively  abruptly. 
The  conjunction  of  the  symptoms,  with  perhaps  the  knowledge  of 
an  epidemic  of  this  disease,  should  lead  to  the  immediate  isolation 
of  the  individual  and  to  the  adoption  of  the  disinfectant  measures 
already  described. 

The  medicinal  treatment  should  consist  primarily  in  the  adminis- 
tration of  a  brisk  saline  purge,  and  this  should  be  accompanied  by  a 
diaphoretic  mixture,  to  which  some  form  of  opium  should  be  added 
to  allay  the  severity  of  the  pain  in  the  loins.  Sometimes  this  pain 
may  be  further  controlled  by  the  application  of  fomentations,  or  if 
very  severe  it  may  necessitate  the  employment  of  hypodermatic  injec- 
tions of  morphine,  or  the  use  of  powder  of  ipecacuanha  and  opium, 
the  latter  being  of  particular  service,  since  in  addition  it  favors 
diaphoresis. 

The  sickness  during  the  initial  stage  is  rarely  controllable,  but  it 
may  be  diminished  in  frequency  by  sucking  small  pieces  of  ice  or 
by  repeatedly  sipping  ice-cold  water.  Although  the  febrile  stage 
may  cause  much  discomfort  and  headache,  very  little  can  be  done 
to  relieve  these  symptoms ;  the  antipyretics,  such  as  antifebrine  or 
antipyrine,  being  of  very  little  use  in  this  disease,  though  in  moder- 
ate doses  they  may  serve  to  relieve  headache.  They  should  be  given 
only  in  small  doses,  insufficient  to  affect  the  temperature,  since  their 
depressant  action  is  by  no  means  devoid  of  risk.  Some  slight  relief 
may  be  obtained  from  tepid  sponging  of  the  surface  of  the  body,  or 


SMALLPOX.  427 

from  the  application  of  ice  bags  to  the  body  or  head ;  but,  as  a  rule, 
it  is  better  to  avoid  these  raeasures,  since,  although  they  may  serve 
to  moderate  the  high  temperature,  they  appear  to  prolong  the  initial 
stage,  and  it  should  be  remembered  that  with  the  appearance  of  the 
eruption  the  febrile  condition  abates,  though  the  temperature  will 
rise  subsequently  during  the  stage  of  suppuration. 

The  treatment  during  the  earlier  stage  must  be  determined  by  the 
predominant  symptoms.  As  a  rule,  the  chief  indications  are  to  be 
found  in  the  condition  of  the  pulse  and  the  appearance  of  the  erup- 
tion ;  the  former,  when  weak  and  rapid,  calls  for  the  administration 
of  stimulants,  and,  as  the  strength  is  commonly  greatly  undermined 
by  this  disease,  there  is  distinct  advantage  in  the  frequent  employ- 
ment of  quinine,  in  doses  of  2  to  4  grains  three  times  a  day.  Larger 
doses  appear  to  exert  but  little  influence  over  the  temperature,  while 
they  may  produce  much  headache  and  discomfort. 

Hebra  recommends  the  use  of  the  continuous  warm  bath  in  severe, 
discrete,  and  in  confluent  cases,  and  this  recommendation  is  approved 
by  Goodall  and  Washbourn,^  who  have  found  it  of  great  value  in 
allaying  the  terrible  irritation  of  the  skin  and  in  inducing  the 
patient  to  sleep.  They  consider  that  if  suitable  arrangements  are 
made  for  the  patient  to  recline  with  his  head  out  of  the  water,  and 
for  emptying  and  refilling  the  bath,  he  may  be  left  in  it  for  days 
together. 

When  the  eruption  assumes  the  hemorrhagic  form,  chloride  of 
iron  should  be  given  with  quinine ;  in  fact,  this  mixture  may  be 
administered  from  the  commencement  of  the  disease,  when  it  is 
known  that  other  cases  in  the  prevailing  epidemic  have  exhibited 
hemorrhagic  symptoms.  The  liability  to  subsequent  disfigurement 
depends  upon  the  severity  of  the  eruption  and  the  depth  to  which 
the  skin  is  involved.  The  disfigurement,  accordingly,  does  not 
appear  to  be  under  the  control  of  any  therapeutic  measures.  It  is 
customary,  however,  to  use  inunctions  of  carbolic  oil  over  the  whole 
surface,  partly  to  diminish  the  risks  of  mfection  and  partly  to  in- 
crease the  pliability  of  the  skin,  since  the  inflammatory  swelling 
frequently  causes  considerable  discomfort.  When  the  eruption  is 
particularly  full  on  the  face,  it  may  be  covered  with  strips  of  lint 
soaked  in  disinfectant  solution  or  in  dilute  silver  nitrate  solution. 

Goodall  and  Washbourn  advocate  the  treatment  of  the  eruption 

^  Manual  of  Infectious  Diseases,  p.  214. 


428  SPECIFIC  INFECTIOUS  DISEASES. 

on  antiseptic  principles,  such  as  the  application  of  vaseline  and  iodo- 
form, carbolized  oil  (1  in  20),  oxide  of  zinc  ointment,  or  linimentum 
calcis.  They  recommend  that  a  mask  of  lint,  soaked  either  in  boric 
acid  lotion  or  in  glycerin  and  water,  should  be  kept  on  the  face. 
They  find  that  the  extreme  itching  during  the  stage  of  healing  i& 
best  allayed  by  sponging  the  skin  with  a  lotion  consisting  of  1  part 
of  dilute  acetic  acid  to  3  parts  of  water. 

Occasionally  it  is  recommended  that  the  pustules  should  be  pricked 
with  a  needle  previously  rendered  aseptic,  so  as  to  hasten  the  forma- 
tion of  scabs,  and,  after  their  evacuation,  they  should  be  touched 
with  silver  nitrate,  to  promote  more  healthy  action.  This  procedure, 
however,  does  not  suffice  to  prevent  disfigurement  and  does  not  appear 
to  shorten  the  suppurative  stage.  Other  local  applications  which 
have  been  employed  from  time  to  time  are  ointments  of  carbolic 
acid  or  of  thymol.  There  is  but  little  evidence,  however,  that  either 
of  these  is  preferable  to  the  simple  application  of  vaseline. 

The  use  of  perchloride  of  iron  has  also  been  recommended,  either 
before  suppuration  or  after  the  pustules  have  been  pricked.  This 
solution  is  undoubtedly  beneficial  as  an  antiseptic,  but  it  may  pro- 
duce considerable  irritation.  Prior  to  the  stage  of  suppuration  there 
may  sometimes  be  great  complaint  of  pain,  owing  to  the  extent  of 
inflammatory  action.  The  pain  is  naturally  greatest  in  those  parts 
of  the  body  where  the  eruption  is  most  extensive,  as,  for  example, 
in  the  face  and  on  the  backs  of  the  hands.  This  pain  may  be  dimin- 
ished by  hot  fomentations,  which  appear  to  hasten  the  stage  of  sup- 
puration. 

For  the  control  of  bleeding  in  hemorrhagic  smallpox,  Goodall  and 
Washbourn  recommend  the  use  every  three  or  four  hours  of  a  mix- 
ture containing  from  20  to  25  drops  of  oil  of  turpentine  and  ^  drachm 
of  fluid  extract  of  ergot.  Local  treatment  must  frequently  be 
adopted ;  some  writers  advocate  astringent  remedies,  but  the  appli- 
cation of  ice  to  the  bleeding  parts  affords  the  best  chance  of  success. 

The  rise  of  temperature  during  suppuration  ordinarily  commences 
about  the  eighth  day,  and  may  continue,  with  slight  oscillations,  until 
the  twelfth  day.  During  this  period  the  employment  of  stimulants 
and  of  tonics  is  perhaps  most  imperative,  since  it  is  during  this  stage 
that  the  pulse  is  weakest  and  that  symptoms  of  heart  failure  may  be 
present.  Should  the  pulse  continue  to  be  unsatisfactory  in  spite  of 
the  administration  of  brandy,  or  other  form  of  stimulant,  the  use 
of  cardiac  tonics  becomes  imperative.    Strychnine  and  digitalis  may 


SMALLPOX.  429 

be  given  in  suitable  doses  by  the  mouth,  or,  when  the  symptoms  are 
more  urgent,  strychnine  should  be  administered  subcutaneously, 
either  separately  or  with  ether.  During  the  stage  of  suppuration 
the  use  of  carbolic  or  olive  oil  should  be  continued,  while  comfort 
may  be  greatly  increased  by  frequent  sponging  with  a  solution  of 
corrosive  mercuric  chloride,  1  in  2000.  The  eruption  in  uncompli- 
cated cases  ordinarily  subsides  from  the  eleventh  to  the  thirteenth 
day,  the  pustules  being  converted  into  scabs,  which  gradually  dry 
and  separate,  while  the  inflammatory  thickening  of  the  skin  dimin- 
ishes rapidly.  This  stage  practically  forms  a  short  prelude  to  con- 
valescence, and  meanwhile,  when  unaccompanied  by  complications, 
the  treatment  should  consist  in  the  continued  use  of  antiseptic  lotions 
and  in  the  employment  of  tonic  remedies,  such  as  quinine,  strychnine, 
and  iron,  together  with  a  fairly  liberal  diet. 

The  complications  which  may  arise  during  an  attack  of  smallpox 
are  numerous  and  important.  During  the  course  of  this  disease 
ulceration  of  the  cornea  may  occur,  and  this  condition  demands 
prompt  action  on  account  of  the  danger  of  the  formation  of  a  per- 
manent opacity.  This  ulceration  is  to  be  dealt  with  by  the  applica- 
tion of  silver  nitrate,  to  be  followed  by  cold  compresses.  Should 
the  pain  be  very  severe,  opium  should  be  administered,  and  when 
there  are  indications  of  inflammatory  action  in  the  iris,  atropine 
should  be  applied  locally. 

The  eruption  occasionally  affects  the  mucous  membrane  of  the 
mouth  or  the  fauces.  In  the  mouth  it  causes  much  pain  and  dis- 
taste for  food,  and  necessitates  the  use  of  disinfectant  solutions,  such 
as  potassium  permanganate  or  diluted  chlorine  water.  When  the 
fauces  are  affected  urgent  symptoms  may  arise,  owing  to  the  inter- 
ference with  respiration  by  consecutive  oedema.  This  oedema  is 
comparable  to  that  which  occasionally  occurs  in  the  course  of  acute 
renal  dropsy,  and  the  symptoms  may  often  be  sufficiently  urgent  to 
call  for  tracheotomy. 

To  avoid  eye  complications  with  smallpox  the  utmost  cleanliness 
is  essentiaL  The  lids  and  conjunctiva  should  be  bathed  frequently 
with  lotions  of  boric  acid  and  potassium  permanganate.  Goodall 
and  Washbourn  recommend  the  following  ointment  for  suppuration 
of  the  Meibomian  glands  or  hair  sacs  : 

R. — Hydrargyri  oxidi  flavi    ......  gr.  xvj. 

Acidi  borici    ........  gr.  xx. 

Cocainse  hydrocliloratis  .         .         .  .         .         .  gr.  x. 

Petrolati  molle       .         .         .         .         .         .         •  %]• 


430  SPECIFIC  INFECTIO  US  DISEASES. 

Other  complications  connected  with  the  eruption  are  erysipelas, 
gangrene,  or  the  formation  of  abscesses.  In  addition  to  the  treat- 
ment adopted  for  these  conditions  under  ordinary  circumstances, 
these  complications  should  entail  the  free  use  of  stimulants  and  of 
a  nutritious  form  of  diet. 

Pulmonary  complications  sometimes  arise  in  the  course  of  small- 
pox, or  they  may  even  make  their  appearance  after  convalescence 
has  apparently  become  established.  Of  these  the  most  important 
are  pneumonia  and  empyema.  Their  treatment  in  no  way  differs 
from  that  usually  adopted  for  these  diseases,  but,  since  the  patient 
is  already  in  an  extremely  debilitated  condition,  stimulants  and 
tonic  remedies  must  be  freely  used. 

During  the  period  of  convalescence  the  separation  of  the  scabs 
may  be  hastened  by  the  frequent  use  of  warm  baths,  and  the  risks 
of  infection  may  be  diminished  by  inunctions  of  olive  oil  or  of  gly- 
cerin, which  favor  the  detachment  of  epithelial  scales  in  the  bath, 
while  they  diminish  the  risks  of  aerial  infection.  The  warm  bath 
may  with  advantage  be  frequently  impregnated  with  disinfectant 
solutions. 

Chicken-pox  (Varicella).  This  affection  is  in  general  so  mild 
that  it  does  not  call  for  any  special  treatment.  The  chief  indica- 
tions are  to  save  the  patient  from  disfigurement  and  to  prevent  com- 
plications and  the  spread  of  the  disease.  The  appearance  of  the  rash 
may  occasionally  be  accompanied  by  mild  febrile  symptoms,  which 
will  afford  justification  for  keeping  the  patient  in  bed,  but  frequently 
these  may  have  escaped  notice  until  the  rash  claims  attention  ;  isola- 
tion should  then  be  enforced  until  all  the  scabs  have  become  detached. 

Care  should  be  taken  to  prevent  the  child  from  picking  or  scratch- 
ing the  scabs,  since  the  early  detachment  may  favor  suppuration  and 
destruction  of  tissue.  The  irritation  may  be  allayed  by  the  use  of 
mild  alkaline  lotions,  but  with  young  children  it  is  often  necessary 
to  make  them  wear  fingerless  gloves  or  even  to  tie  the  hands,  to 
prevent  restlessness.  If  the  rash  affects  the  scalp  it  will  be  desir- 
able to  cut  the  hair  short,  to  avoid  matting  and  to  promote  cleanli- 
ness. When,  in  spite  of  these  precautions,  thick  scabs  and  sloughs 
form,  they  should  be  removed  by  poultices,  and  the  raw  surface 
should  be  dressed  with  antiseptic  applications.  The  formation  of 
sloughs  usually  calls  for  the  administration  of  quinine  or  nux  vomica, 
together  with  stimulants. 

The  limitation  of  movements  involved  in  isolation  ordinarily 


SCARLET  FEVER.  431 

leads  to  the  need  of  an  occasional  saline  purge,  and  perhaps  also  to 
the  administration  of  a  mild  diaphoretic  and  diuretic  mixture.  The 
possible  occurrence  of  nephritis,  and  of  cutaneous  ecchymoses  and 
hemorrhage  from  mucous  membranes,  should  be  borne  in  mind. 

Scarlet  Fever  {Scarlatina).  During  the  initial  stage  of  scarlet 
fever  some  uncertainty  may  be  felt  as  to  the  nature  of  the  disease, 
though  a  provisional  diagnosis  may  be  made  from  the  appearance  of 
the  throat,  from  the  frequency  of  sickness,  and  from  the  rise  of  tem- 
perature, and  additional  probability  is  lent  to  this  diagnosis  if  the 
occurrence  of  other  cases  of  scarlet  fever  in  the  neighborhood  has 
already  been  recognized.  This  provisional  diagnosis  should  lead  to 
the  adoption  of  the  measures  already  detailed  for  guidance  in  dealing 
with  Specific  Infectious  Diseases  (see  p.  419),  and  although  in  this 
disease  the  risks  of  infection  are  greatest  during  the  stage  of  desqua- 
mation, there  is  strong  probability  that  to  a  lesser  extent  the  disease 
is  infectious  from  its  commencement. 

The  treatment  should  commence  with  the  administration  of  a  saline 
purgative,  which  will  be  equally  serviceable  whether  the  case  ulti- 
mately proves  to  be  one  of  simple  tonsillitis  or  of  scarlet  fever,  and 
also  with  the  employment  of  a  stimulating  diaphoretic  mixture  con- 
taining spirit  of  nitrous  ether  and  liquor  ammonii  acetatis.  In  mild 
cases  very  little  medicinal  treatment  is  ordinarily  required,  but  it  is 
essential  that  the  patient  should  be  kept  in  bed  for  at  least  a  fort- 
night, and  that  he  should  subsequently  be  kept  in  a  room  of  even 
temperature  until  desquamation  has  entirely  ceased.  This  involves 
isolation  for  a  period  which  varies  from  four  to  six  weeks  after 
desquamation  has  commenced. 

During  the  early  febrile  condition,  light  liquid  nutritious  diet 
must  be  given,  and  this  is  necessitated  both  by  the  febrile  state  and 
by  the  soreness  of  the  throat ;  even  after  the  fall  of  temperature  it 
is  advisable  to  maintain  the  use  of  liquid  diet  until  desquamation 
is  well  advanced  and  until  frequent  examinations  of  the  urine  have 
shown  the  constant  absence  of  albuminuria.  In  addition  to  these 
daily  examinations  of  the  urine,  it  is  desirable  to  take  the  tempera- 
ture repeatedly,  even  though  the  general  condition  appears  to  be 
satisfactory,  since  a  sudden  rise  of  temperature  often  affords  the 
earliest  indication  of  complications  or  sequelae  of  this  disease. 

It  is  sometimes  recommended  that  tincture  of  aconite  should  be 
given  during  the  initial  rise  of  temperature,  and  it  has  been  asserted 
that  this  drug  causes  reduction  of  temperature  and  diminution  of 


432  SPECIFIC  INFECTIOUS  DISEASES. 

inflammatory  action  in  the  fauces.  In  mild  cases,  however,  tincture 
of  aconite  does  not  appear  to  be  required,  while  in  severe  cases  its 
depressant  action  may  be  extremely  undesirable.  Antiseptic  gargles 
may  relieve  pain  in  the  fauces  and  may  also  be  of  service  in  con- 
trolling local  action,  but  in  mild  cases  they  are  rarely  required,  the 
large  majority  of  patients  with  scarlet  fever  needing  extremely  little 
treatment  other  than  isolation  and  protection  during  the  stage  of 
desquamation. 

The  Medical  Officer  of  Health  for  Leicester,  Dr.  Munk^  (British 
Medical  Journal,  1897,  vol.  ii,  p.  1435),  has  given  the  treatment 
with  the  hot  acid  bath  a  trial  at  the  Borough  Fever  Hospital  of 
that  town.  The  acid  bath  treatment  consists  in  bathing  the  scarla- 
tinal patient  in  water  at  102°  F.  containing  J  an  ounce  of  commer- 
cial sulphuric  acid  to  every  10  gallons  of  water.  The  patient  is  kept 
in  this  bath  and  sponged  for  about  twenty  minutes,  and  then  envel- 
oped in  flannel  in  bed.  Usually  he  perspires  freely,  and  is  then 
sponged  with  tepid  water  every  three  or  four  hours  as  long  as  the 
temperature  remains  above  normal.  Dr.  Munk  concludes  that  the 
statement  made  that  under  this  treatment  there  is  no  desquamation 
is  not  correct,  but  there  is  certainly  considerable  improvement  in 
the  mode  and  rapidity  of  shedding  the  dead  epithelial  scales.  There 
does  not  appear,  however,  to  be  any  ground  for  believing  the  infec- 
tivity  of  the  case  is  shortened  in  duration,  for  3.6  per  cent,  of  the 
cases  were  followed  by  "  return  "  cases,  and  there  is  no  convincing 
evidence  that  the  mortality  was  lessened  in  comparison  with  the 
mortality  of  patients  of  the  same  age  treated  in  other  ways. 

It  is  relatively  rare  for  the  pyrexia  of  scarlet  fever  to  require 
treatment,  and  this  circumstance  is  peculiarly  fortunate,  since  most 
of  the  measures  at  our  service  for  reducing  temperature  are  contra- 
indicated  in  this  disease — antipyretic  drugs  by  their  depressing  influ- 
ence, and  cold  baths  and  cold  compresses  by  the  risk  of  developing 
complications.  When  hyperpyrexia  arises  it  must  be  dealt  with  by 
warm  sponging  instead  of  cold  applications,  and  the  warm  sponging 
must  be  rapidly  performed,  so  as  to  cause  as  little  exposure  as  pos- 
sible. 

With  the  view  of  reducing  the  fever  in  hyperpyrexia  it  has  been 
recommended  that  iced  water  should  be  given  frequently,  that  nour- 
ishment should  be  given  cold,  and  that  small,  cold  rectal  enemata 

^  Quoted  from  the  Year-Book  of  Treatment,  1899,  p.  155. 


SCARLET  FEVER.  433 

should  be  employed  from  time  to  time.  The  employment  of  the 
warm  bath  is,  as  a  rule,  preferable  to  these  measures,  since  it  may 
favor  free  diaphoresis ;  it  is  not,  however,  devoid  of  risk  unless  ex- 
treme care  is  taken  to  prevent  chill.  On  removal  from  the  bath 
the  patient  should  be  rapidly  dried  with  warm  towels  and  quickly 
enveloped  in  warm  flannel  garments,  which  will  serve  to  maintain 
the  diaphoresis  initiated  by  the  bath. 

The  principal  complications  which  occur  in  connection  with  scarlet 
fever  are  those  affecting  the  kidney,  the  auditory  organs,  and  the 
glandular  system,  and  of  the  three  the  renal  changes  are  by  far  the 
most  serious.  Even  in  mild  cases  of  scarlet  fever  small  traces  of 
albumin  may  frequently  be  passed  during  the  febrile  stage,  but  these 
usually  disappear  as  the  temperature  falls.  It  has  been  considered 
probable  that  these  mild  forms  of  febrile  albuminuria  may  indicate 
toxic  influence  upon  the  renal  vessels.  This  type  of  albuminuria 
obviously  does  not  call  for  treatment  other  than  the  continued  use 
of  a  liquid  dietary. 

During  convalescence  acute  nephritis  may  occur,  this  special  form 
having  received  the  name  of  scarlatinal  nephritis.  To  some  extent 
this  complication  appears  to  result  from  exposure  to  cold,  but  it  is 
largely  influenced  by  atmospheric  conditions.  The  treatment  of  this 
condition  has  already  been  described  under  the  heading  of  Scarla- 
tinal Nephritis. 

During  convalescence  inflammation  of  the  middle  ear  may  some- 
times arise.  This  is  always  associated  with  severe  pain,  and  may 
lead  to  suppuration,  which  in  turn,  unless  relieved,  may  cause  de- 
struction of  the  middle  ear  and  perhaps  form  the  foundation  for 
meningeal  disease.  Hence,  when  indications  of  otitis  media  are 
found,  prompt  measures  should  be  adopted  for  its  relief.  Pain 
may  be  controlled  by  warm  applications  over  the  ear,  or,  with 
greater  certainty,  by  the  vapor  of  chloroform,  which  may  conveni- 
ently be  used  by  warming  a  small  tumbler  or  teacup  with  warm 
water,  and  then  putting  into  it  a  small  piece  of  sponge  or  a  few 
slips  of  blotting-paper,  upon  which  10  to  20  minims  of  chloroform 
are  dropped.  If  the  glass  is  then  closely  applied  to  the  side  of  the 
head  so  as  to  include  the  ear,  the  vapor  which  arises  penetrates  the 
meatus  and  relieves  pain.  The  membrane  should  always  be  exam- 
ined when  there  is  any  complaint  of  pain.  Sometimes  it  is  found 
that  it  is  already  perforated ;  but  if  there  is  any  bulging  of  the 
membrane  a  small  puncture  should  be  made  to  allow  of  the  exit  of 

28 


434  SPECIFIC  INFECTIOUS  DISEASES. 

fluid,  and  subsequently  further  relief  may  be  afforded  by  the  use 
of  dilute  warm  solutions  of  borax  or  of  zinc  sulphate. 

Glandular  enlargements  may  occur  in  connection  with  otitis  media, 
and  they  are  not  limited  to  the  lymphatic  glands  of  the  neck.  The 
treatment  of  these  enlargements  depends  upon  indications  of  suppu- 
ration. When  associated  with  fluctuation  and  with  much  throbbing 
pain  they  should  be  freely  incised,  but  if  they  assume  a  more  chronic 
type  they  call  for  tonic  treatment,  pending  perhaps  the  subsequent 
adoption  of  surgical  measures  for  their  removal. 

Other  complications  which  may  arise  in  more  insidious  forms  are 
those  connected  with  the  heart  and  with  the  organs  of  respiration. 
Pericarditis  may  occur  during  an  attack  of  scarlet  fever,  while  endo- 
carditis may  develop  more  gradually  during  convalescence.  Pleurisy 
also  is  frequently  of  very  slow  onset  during  the  stage  of  convales- 
cence, and  is  of  especial  importance,  since  it  often  assumes  the  form 
of  empyema.  In  the  treatment  of  scarlet  fever,  therefore,  frequent 
examinations  of  the  heart  and  chest  should  be  made.  The  cardiac 
changes  are  sometimes  associated  with  arthritic  pains  and  with  the 
development  of  chorea.  Hence,  the  early  recognition  of  these  com- 
plications should  entail  additional  care  and  treatment  during  conva- 
lescence. 

During  the  stage  of  desquamation  warm  disinfectant  baths  should 
be  used  repeatedly,  and  inunctions  of  oil  and  glycerin  should  be 
employed.  Thus  the  risk  of  infection  may  be  diminished,  and 
much  of  the  itching  which  so  frequently  accompanies  convalescence 
may  also  be  relieved.  Tonic  remedies  may  also  be  administered  if 
there  is  much  weakness,  and  for  this  purpose  the  syrup  of  ferrous 
phosphate  and  the  syrup  of  ferrous  iodide  are  very  valuable. 

Measles  (MorbilU).  The  comparatively  mild  course  of  uncom- 
plicated measles  is  generally  well  recognized,  and  frequently  tempts 
parents  to  consider  that  the  disease,  as  a  rule,  requires  no  treatment 
beyond  isolation  and  nursing.  This  is  certainly  true  when  once  the 
true  nature  of  the  disease  has  been  recognized  and  so  far  as  uncom- 
plicated cases  are  concerned.  During  the  stage  of  invasion,  how- 
ever, the  catarrhal  symptoms  frequently  call  for  treatment,  and, 
moreover,  during  this  stage  the  diagnosis  is  often  very  obscure 
unless  the  existence  of  an  epidemic  is  known.  The  onset,  marked 
by  coryza  and  sneezing,  is  within  a  few  hours  frequently  accom- 
panied by  troublesome  cough. 

The  chief  indication  of  the  specific  nature  of  the  disease  is  often 


MEASLES.  435 

to  be  found  in  photophobia,  with  some  redness  of  the  eyes  and  eye- 
lids. During  the  stage  of  invasion  other  symptoms  may  arise,  as, 
for  example,  vomiting  and  headache,  while  occasionally  some  com- 
plaint is  made  of  soreness  of  the  throat.  The  temperature  during 
the  initial  stage  may  range  from  103°  to  104°  F.  Should  there  be 
any  suspicion  of  measles,  the  treatment  already  indicated  for  Specific 
Infectious  Diseases  (see  p.  419)  must  be  initiated.  To  avoid  spread 
of  the  disease  the  child  must  be  isolated,  but  very  frequently  it  will 
be  found  that  if  the  prevailing  epidemic  is  of  a  mild  type  the  parents 
prefer  letting  all  the  children  of  the  family  contract  the  disease  to- 
gether to  avoid  further  trouble,  so  that  although  full  instructions 
for  isolation  may  be  given,  it  is  not  uncommon  to  find  that  all  the 
children  in  the  family  who  have  not  already  had  measles  are  sleep- 
ing  in  the  same  room. 

At  the  commencement  diaphoretic  measures  are  frequently  of  some 
service.  Certainly,  the  characteristic  eruption  often  appears  to  be 
favored  by  the  use  of  simple  diaphoretics  and  of  warm  clothing,  and,, 
further,  on  account  of  the  photophobia,  it  is  desirable  to  limit  the 
amount  of  light  entering  the  room  during  the  early  days  of  the 
fever. 

The  high  temperature  indicates  the  necessity  for  liquid  food,  while 
the  catarrhal  symptoms  and  the  soreness  of  the  throat  render  de- 
mulcent remedies  of  service ;  hence,  the  treatment  ordinarily  adopted 
includes  the  administration  of  ammonium  acetate,  to  which  ipecacu- 
anha wine  may  be  added  to  relieve  the  catarrhal  trouble.  Simple 
throat  lozenges  or  preparations  of  licorice  are  frequently  of  use  in 
allaying  throat  symptoms,  and  to  some  extent  they  may  diminish 
the  cough. 

When  the  eruption  is  well  developed  and  the  temperature  falls^ 
the  diaphoretic  remedies  may  be  discontinued,  though  mild  salines 
may  be  given  with  advantage  until  convalescence  is  fully  established. 
The  risks  of  infection  in  the  case  of  measles  are  greatest  during  the 
early  catarrhal  stage,  but  even  when  catarrhal  symptoms  have  greatly 
abated,  the  patient  may  continue  to  be  highly  infective  during  the 
stage  of  convalescence  and  desquamation.  Hence,  although  the 
child  may  seem  perfectly  well  when  the  eruption  is  fully  developed, 
isolation  must  still  be  insisted  upon ;  and,  as  in  scarlet  fever,  the 
risks  of  infection  may  to  some  extent  be  subsequently  diminished 
by  the  use  of  warm  baths  and  of  inunctions  of  olive  oil  to  which 
carbolic  acid  has  been  added. 


436  SPECIFIC  INFECTIO  US  DISEASES. 

An  additional  reason  for  continued  care  lies  in  the  f reqn  ency  with , 
which  pulmonary  complications  may  arise.  If  it  were  not  for  com- 
plications, measles  would  be  a  comparatively  unimportant  disease, 
but  the  early  catarrhal  condition  may  readily  lead  to  indications  of 
severe  bronchitis,  or,  more  commonly,  of  bronchopneumonia.  This 
complication  must  be  treated  upon  the  principles  already  laid  down, 
and  its  dangers  depend  partly  upon  the  age  of  the  child  and  partly 
upon  the  extent  of  lung  attacked.  Of  the  other  complications  or 
sequelae  of  measles,  the  most  important  is  the  rapid  development  of 
tubercular  changes  which  may  involve  the  bronchial  glands  or  lead 
to  miliary  tuberculosis.  This  complication  is,  of  course,  extremely 
difficult  to  avoid  in  those  individuals  who,  by  hereditary  weakness, 
are  prone  to  develop  any  tubercular  infective  material  which  may 
be  inhaled  or  otherwise  acquired. 

Independently  of  these  more  serious  complications,  cough  may  often 
be  extremely  troublesome  from  laryngeal  or  pharyngeal  catarrh,  and 
may  necessitate  the  employment  of  alkaline  remedies  or  of  various 
forms  of  linctus.  Ammonium  carbonate  or  ammonium  chloride  may 
be  given  with  ipecacuanha  wine,  spirit  of  chloroform,  and  syrup  of 
tolu,  while  sometimes  in  older  children  the  frequency  of  the  cough 
may  be  further  reduced,  either  by  the  continuous  employment  of  a 
steam  kettle  near  the  bed,  or  by  the  occasional  use  of  inhalations  of 
compound  tincture  of  benzoin,  or  of  sprays  of  glycerin  and  carbolic 
acid. 

When,  in  spite  of  these  remedies,  bronchial  symptoms  develop, 
it  is  well  to  employ  some  stimulating  application  over  the  thorax 
and  subsequently  to  use  a  cotton- wool  jacket. 

When  the  temperature  is  very  high  before  the  full  development 
of  the  rash,  the  body  may  be  sponged  with  tepid  water,  or  a  warm 
bath  may  be  given.  These  measures  are  particularly  serviceable 
when  the  eruption  appears  late,  or  when,  perhaps  in  consequence  of 
chill,  a  brilliant  eruption  suddenly  fades  prematurely.  These  con- 
ditions are  ordinarily  associated  with  severe  headache,  or  possibly 
with  convulsions,  and  they  call  for  diaphoretic  remedies  and  for 
warm  baths  to  favor  the  reappearance  of  the  rash. 

Inflammation  of  the  middle  ear  may  arise  and  lead  to  suppuration 
and  to  perforation  of  the  membrana  tympani,  but  these  complica- 
tions are  somewhat  less  frequent  than  with  scarlet  fever. 

During  convalescence  the  utmost  care  should  be  taken  to  avoid 
exposure  to  cold,  and,  in  addition  to  the  use  of  warm  clothing,  an 


MUMPS.  437 

even  temperature  should  be  maintained  in  the  room.  Convalescence 
may  be  hastened  by  the  use  of  tonic  remedies,  such  as  quinine  and 
iron,  in  doses  adapted  to  the  age  of  the  patient. 

German  Measles  {Rbtheln  or  Rubeola).  The  treatment  of  this 
disease  should  be  the  same  as  that  adapted  to  mild  forms  of  measles, 
though  the  general  course  frequently  renders  special  treatment,  be- 
yond isolation,  comparatively  needless.  The  temperature  very  rarely 
rises  much  above  100°  F.,  and  the  rash  is,  as  a  rule,  unaccompanied 
by  any  severe  complications.  In  some  rare  epidemics  pneumonic 
symptoms  have  been  present,  while  albuminuria  may  also  be  met 
with.  In  general,  however,  in  spite  of  the  development  of  the  rash, 
the  child  feels  so  well  that  it  is  difficult  to  insure  isolation  or  even 
to  keep  him  in  bed. 

During  convalescence  mild  tonic  remedies  may  be  administered 
if  the  appetite  shows  any  signs  of  failing. 

Mumps  {Epidemic  Parotitis).  This  infectious  disease  is  in  the 
main  to  be  treated  with  the  view  of  diminishing  the  risks  of  its 
extension  or  of  the  development  of  complications  after  exposure 
to  infection.  The  first  symptoms  may  not  make  their  appearance 
until  some  two  or  three  weeks  have  elapsed  from  the  time  of  infec- 
tion. The  initial  stage  is  then  marked  by  a  rise  of  temperature  and 
by  some  complaint  of  pain  in  the  region  of  the  parotid  gland.  The 
febrile  condition  indicates  the  need  for  purgatives  and  diaphoretics, 
and  of  these  two  classes  of  remedies  the  former  is  the  more  service- 
able. The  latter  may  not  be  needed,  since  the  temperature  rarely 
rises  much  above  101°. 

The  pain  in  the  region  of  the  parotid  gland  can  be  relieved  by 
warm  applications.  These  are  sometimes  avoided,  owing  to  the 
supposed  risk  of  favoring  suppurative  changes,  and  consequently 
attempts  are  frequently  made  to  relieve  pain  by  placing  two  or  three 
leeches  over  the  swollen  gland.  Suppuration  is,  however,  practi- 
cally unknown  as  a  complication,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  relief 
afforded  by  hot  fomentations  and  by  stimulating  liniments  is  beyond 
dispute.  The  addition  of  a  few  drops  of  laudanum  or  of  belladonna 
and  glycerin  will  often  serve  further  to  diminish  the  pain.  The 
swelling  and  pain  of  mumps  are  also  said  to  be  rapidly  relieved  by 
inunctions  with  the  following  ointment : 

"  E.— Ichthyol, 

Lanolin,  aa  partes  sequales. — M. 


438  SPECIFIC  INFECTIOUS  DISEASES. 

From  the  commencement  of  the  disease  the  inability  to  open  the 
mouth  to  any  extent  will  necessitate  the  employment  of  liquid  nour- 
ishment. This  may  consist  of  milk  and  of  beef-tea,  or,  when  there 
is  much  weakness,  the  more  concentrated  forms  of  meat  essences  may 
be  used,  either  as  a  liquid  or  in  the  form  of  a  jelly. 

Orchitis  is  the  principle  complication  which  may  either  arise  in 
the  course  of  this  disease  or  may  occur  subsequently.  The  result- 
ing pain  may  be  relieved  both  by  fomentations  and  by  poultices, 
though  in  some  instances  the  application  of  ice  bags  appears  to  be 
more  serviceable.  The  occurrence  of  this  complication  during  con- 
valescence is  an  indication  for  absolute  rest  in  bed,  and  it  may  be 
mentioned  that  this  trouble  arises  comparatively  rarely  when  the 
patient  has  been  kept  in  bed  so  long  as  there  is  any  enlargement  or 
tenderness  of  the  parotid  glands.  Although  the  disease  frequently 
affects  both  parotids,  the  one  becoming  enlarged  and  painful  as  im- 
provement occurs  in  the  other,  the  course  of  treatment  is  in  no  way 
to  be  modified  on  this  account. 

Whooping-cough  {Pertussis).  It  is  perhaps  scarcely  necessary 
to  enter  into  much  detail  regarding  the  prominent  symptoms  of 
whooping-cough,  since  the  cough  itself  is  so  characteristic,  with  its 
succession  of  spasmodic  expiratory  efforts,  followed  by  long-drawn, 
noisy  inspiration,  that,  when  once  heard,  it  is  never  likely  to  be  for- 
gotten. It  occurs  most  commonly  in  children,  but  cases  may  be  met 
with  at  almost  any  age.  Frequently  it  may  commence  as  an  appar- 
ently simple  cough,  and  it  is  distinctly  contagious  before  the  char- 
acteristic whoop  occurs.  The  child  may  exhibit  symptoms  of  a 
catarrhal  nature  for  a  week  or  so,  and  during  this  time,  if  no  epidemic 
exists  in  the  neighborhood,  their  true  nature  may  be  overlooked. 
The  cough,  however,  steadily  increases  in  severity,  and  by  degrees 
assumes  a  paroxysmal  character,  until  finally  the  characteristic 
whoop  is  heard. 

The  disease  is  associated  with  numerous  and  important  complica- 
tions, which  differ,  however,  to  some  extent  with  the  time  of  year, 
bronchitic  troubles  being  most  frequent  during  the  late  autumn  and 
early  spring,  while  during  the  summer  months  the  chief  trouble  is 
generally  to  be  found  in  the  frequency  with  which  vomiting  follows 
the  cough,  and  tends  to  produce  considerable  inanition. 

Whooping-cough  long  shared  with  diphtheria  the  undesirable 
character  of  affording  scope  for  continuous  therapeutic  activity ;  at 
one  time  endless  lists  of  specifics  were  recommended  for  these  two 


WHO  OFING-CO  UGH.  439 

diseases,  and  certainly,  so  far  as  whooping-cough  is  concerned,  the 
latest  specific  is  generally  the  one  which  gives  the  greatest  satisfac- 
tion for  a  time,  but  with  increased  opportunities  of  observation  its 
beneficial  action  seems  less  certain,  and  ultimately  nearly  every  spe- 
cific that  has  been  recommended  is  gradually  relegated  to  oblivion. 
No  practitioner  who  has  had  extensive  experience  in  the  treatment 
of  children's  diseases  will  probably  care  to  dissent  from  this  some- 
what gloomy  estimate  of  the  power  of  drugs  in  this  disease,  and  it 
can  only  be  hoped  that  inasmuch  as  whooping-cough  is  in  all  prob- 
ability due  to  the  presence  of  a  bacillus,  this  bacillus  will  eventually 
be  recognized,  and  that  we  may  be  provided  with  some  new  method 
of  treatment  which  will  be  as  certain  in  its  operation  as  antitoxin  is 
in  the  treatment  of  diphtheria. 

Meanwhile,  although  the  treatment  is  unsatisfactory,  it  is  neces- 
sary to  offer  some  indications  of  the  course  of  action  which  perhaps 
gives  the  best  results,  and  it  is  still  more  necessary  for  the  practi- 
tioner to  impress  upon  the  parents  the  gravity  of  this  malady  and 
the  dangers  which  may  arise  unless  appropriate  precautions  are 
taken,  since  there  is  a  great  tendency  to  consider  that  the  disease  is 
only  whooping-cough,  and,  therefore,  of  no  importance,  since,  like 
other  infectious  fevers,  it  must  run  its  natural  course. 

Daring  the  early  stage,  when  catarrhal  symptoms  are  present, 
there  may  be  a  slight  rise  of  temperature,  and  this  alone  should 
indicate  the  importance  of  employing  some  mild  saline  mixture 
and  also  of  keeping  the  child  in  the  house,  and  perhaps  in  bed,  if 
the  temperature  is  at  all  above  100°  F.  Although  in  the  summer 
months  whooping-cough  may  be  comparatively  mild,  the  tendency 
to  the  occurrence  of  lung  changes  has  always  to  be  counted  upon, 
and  these  may  include  bronchitis,  pneumonia,  or  even  pulmonary 
collapse. 

When  the  disease  is  fairly  established  various  antispasmodics  may 
be  employed,  and  of  these  the  most  favored  are  belladonna,  potas- 
sium bromide,  and  chloral.  Of  the  three,  belladonna  gives  the  best 
results  in  checking  the  violence  and  the  frequency  of  the  cough. 
To  be  of  any  service  it  should  be  given  in  comparatively  large  doses, 
and  it  is  worth  remembering  that  children  relatively  bear  belladonna 
much  better  than  adults.  In.  using  the  tincture  of  belladonna  it  is 
well  to  commence  with  small  doses,  such  as  |^  to  2  minims,  and  to 
increase  the  amount  administered  as  toleration  becomes  established, 
until  as  much  as  5  minims  may  be  given  in  a  single  dose.     The  ex- 


440  SPECIFIC  INFECTIOUS  DISEASES. 

tract  has  often  been  recommended  in  preference  to  the  tincture.  It 
has  the  inconvenience  of  being  necessarily  administered  in  pill  form, 
which  may  present  disadvantages  to  small  children ;  if  the  extract 
is  used,  it  should  be  given  in  doses  of  ^^  of  a  grain  three  times  a 
day ;  this  dose  often  requires  to  be  repeated  until  physiological 
symptoms  are  produced. 

To  some  extent  belladonna  is  of  indirect  service  when  adminis- 
tered in  combination  with  sodium  bicarbonate,  since  it  then  serves 
not  only  to  allay  the  cough,  but  also  to  diminish  the  tendency  to 
vomiting.  The  belladonna  treatment  of  whooping-cough  is  not 
always  satisfactory,  and  the  development  of  undue  physiological 
symptoms  may  call  for  a  diminution  of  the  dose,  even  though  the 
continuance  of  the  cough  might  indicate  the  need  for  an  increase. 

Both  potassium  bromide  and  chloral  hydrate  are  useful  in  dimin- 
ishing the  frequency  of  cough,  especially  when  it  appears  to  follow 
as  a  reflex  act  after  slight  irritation,  such  as  might  be  produced 
during  the  time  that  food  is  being  taken.  These  drugs  are,  how- 
ever, very  often  of  great  service  when  administered  at  night,  since 
their  hypnotic  action  lessens  the  tendency  to  cough,  and  by  encour- 
aging sleep  diminishes  the  exhausting  character  of  the  disease.  None 
of  these  three  can  be  regarded  as  in  any  sense  curative.  They  merely 
serve  to  tide  over  the  duration  of  the  disease  with  somewhat  less 
discomfort  and  somewhat  less  interference  with  the  general  health, 
and  they  are  only  to  be  used  alone  when  the  physical  signs  indicate 
the  comparative  absence  of  bronchitic  or  of  pulmonary  changes. 

In  a  considerable  number  of  cases  it  will  be  found  that  the  bron- 
chitic or  pneumonic  complications — the  latter  being  generally  of  a 
catarrhal  form — necessitate  the  use  of  remedies  which  will  favor  the 
removal  of  expectoration ;  in  other  words,  it  is  often  essential  to 
treat  children  as  though  the  disease  consisted  solely  of  bronchitis  or 
pneumonia. 

Violent  fits  of  coughing  may  produce  vomiting,  hemorrhage,  or 
other  complications,  which  will  then  call  for  special  treatment. 

I  have  tried  most  of  the  various  specifics  that  have  been  recom- 
mended in  the  treatment  of  whooping-cough,  and  those  which  appear 
to  me  to  offer  the  most  hope  are  those  possessing  antiseptic  powers, 
such  as  carbolic  acid,  used  preferably  as  a  spray,  rather  than  by 
impregnating  the  atmosphere  of  the  room  with  the  vapor  of  the  acid. 
It  has  been  rather  quaintly  claimed  in  favor  of  vaporizing  carbolic 
acid  in  the  sick-room,  that  it  makes    the  atmosphere    sufficiently 


WHO  OPING -CO  UOH.  441 

unpleasant  to  secure  the  absence  of  those  who  are  not  wanted 
there. 

The  same  benefit  may  be  obtained  from  a  method  which  has  been 
strongly  recommended — namely,  the  similar  impregnation  of  the 
atmosphere  with  fumes  from  burning  sulphur.  This  process  is  ordi- 
narily reserved  for  the  disinfection  of  the  room  after  the  convalescence 
of  the  patient,  but  I  have  seen  this  treatment  adopted  for  long  periods, 
even  during  the  early  stages  of  the  disease,  when  the  amount  of  sulphur 
dioxide  in  the  atmosphere  was  sufficient  to  insure  coughing  whenever 
the  room  was  entered.  The  sulphur  fumes,  so  far  as  my  experience 
goes,  are  of  very  little  service,  and  the  same  may  be  said  of  the  use 
of  fumes  of  carbolic  acid,  though  the  carbolic  acid  in  the  form  of 
spray  may  be  more  useful.  In  this  last-named,  however,  it  is  pos- 
sible that  some  of  the  benefit  results  from  the  local  sedative  action 
of  the  drug,  and  from  the  soothing  influence  of  the  vapor  which 
enters  the  respiratory  organs  with  the  carbolic  acid. 

Both  carbolic  acid  and  sulphur  have  been  applied  locally  over  the 
pharynx  and  fauces,  but  these  applications  are  extremely  likely  to 
be  followed  by  coughing,  and  indeed  any  irritation  of  the  fauces 
will  frequently  serve  to  provoke  the  paroxysms. 

Of  late  years  bromoform  has  been  strongly  recommended,  and  it 
has  been  credited  with  being  able  not  only  to  diminish  the  number, 
duration,  and  severity  of  the  attacks,  but  also  to  allay  vomiting. 
Bromoform  is  administered  in  doses  of  from  J  to  2  minims,  accord- 
ing to  the  age  of  the  child,  and  it  may  be  given  in  capsules  contain- 
ing the  above  dose  dissolved  in  oil,  or  it  may  be  mixed  with  syrup 
and  with  mucilage,  and  taken  as  a  mixture  three  or  four  times  a 
day.  When  bromoform  is  pure  it  possesses  an  agreeable  odor  and 
a  somewhat  sweet  taste,  but  under  the  influence  of  direct  sunlight  it 
is  very  rapidly  decomposed,  and  then  these  characters  are  changed, 
and  the  greatest  difficulty  will  be  experienced  in  attempting  its 
administration.  I  have  employed  this  drug  somewhat  largely,  and 
have  found  that  it  does  not  materially  shorten  the  course  of  the  dis- 
ease, and  I  have  also  been  unable  to  convince  myself  that  it  possesses 
any  marked  power  of  diminishing  the  severity  of  the  various  par- 
oxysms. 

Pertussine,  a  proprietary  preparation  which  is  said  to  contain  1 
part  of  thymol  and  7  of  syrup,  at  first  appeared  to  diminish  the  fre- 
quency of  cough,  and  I  found  that  the  number  of  whoops  in  the 
twenty-four  hours  increased  whenever  the  administration  of  pertus- 


442  SPECIFIC  INFECTIOUS  DISEASES. 

sine  was  discontiuued.  After  further  experience,  however,  of  the 
action  of  pertussine,  I  have  become  convinced  that  it  cannot  claim 
the  position  of  a  specific  for  this  disease. 

Heroin  is  another  remedy  of  recent  introduction.  This  is  a  modi- 
fication of  morphine,  which  has  been  introduced  as  a  substitute  for 
the  latter  drug,  and  is  said  to  be  devoid  of  the  power  of  producing 
narcosis  when  employed  in  comparatively  small  doses.  My  experi- 
ence with  this  drug,  however,  is  so  recent  that  I  am  unable  to  speak 
with  any  certainty  as  to  the  results. 

When  bronchitic  symptoms  are  present  there  is  some  advantage 
in  the  employment  of  inhalations  or  sprays  of  various  volatile  sub- 
stances, such  as  turpentine,  terebene,  eucalyptus  oil,  or  peroxide  of 
hydrogen.  Some  of  these  may  be  given  internally,  as  well  as  used 
as  a  spray  or  inhalation,  as,  for  example,  the  oil  of  turpentine  or  oil 
of  eucalyptus.  Although  it  has  been  claimed  for  these  that  they 
possess  antiseptic  powers,  they  appear  rather  to  relieve  the  bron- 
chitic element  of  trouble  than  to  influence  the  course  of  the  disease. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  course  of  this  disease  is  often 
greatly  prolonged  by  association  with  other  sufferers,  and  also  by 
the  establishment  of  a  curious  reflex  excitability  closely  allied  to 
habit.  Both  these  causes,  which  may  induce  an  abnormal  duration 
of  the  disease,  can  readily  be  controlled,  the  former  by  a  change  of 
air  and  surroundings  as  soon  as  the  catarrhal  symptoms  have  disap- 
peared, the  latter  by  the  employment  of  one  or  more  of  the  sedative 
remedies  previously  enumerated.  In  addition  to  sedatives,  conva- 
lescence may  often  be  hastened  by  the  use  of  tonic  remedies.  I 
have  frequently  witnessed  much  benefit  from  the  employment  of  a 
mixture  containing  tincture  of  ferric  chloride,  potassium  chlorate, 
and  very  small  doses  of  tincture  of  opium,  and  this  mixture  appears 
most  serviceable  when  the  conditions  permit  of  free  ventilation  of 
the  rooms  occupied  by  the  child,  and  of  exercise  in  a  garden  or  in 
fields,  where  there  are  no  risks  of  spreading  the  disease.  In  weakly 
children  cod-liver  oil  is  also  of  great  value  during  convalescence ; 
it  assists  nutrition,  and  it  favors  greater  regularity  of  the  intestinal 
functions.  As  in  other  diseases,  however,  its  laxative  properties  call 
for  caution,  since  they  may  induce  troublesome  and  exhaustive  diar- 
rhoea, which  would  directly  defeat  the  chief  object  of  its  employment. 

With  regard  to  the  different  complications  of  this  disease,  refer- 
ence has  already  been  made  to  the  frequency  of  bronchitis  and  other 
pulmonary  conditions,  which  demand  special  treatment.     Various 


WHO  OPINQ-aO  UOH.  443 

forms  of  hemoiTliage  may  arise  from  overstrain  of  the  smaller  ves- 
sels during  the  violent  expiratory  efforts ;  these  hemorrhages, 
although  they  alarm  the  friends,  are  generally  of  comparatively 
little  importance,  and  rarely  call  for  separate  treatment.  The 
most  common  forms  are  epistaxis,  hemorrhage  from  the  gums  and 
the  mouth,  and  subconjunctival  hemorrhage.  In  addition,  albumin- 
uria and  more  rarely  hsematuria  may  be  met  with  ;  they  are  both 
due  to  overstrain  of  vessels,  and  neither  cause  other  symptoms  nor 
lay  the  foundation  for  chronic  forms  of  renal  mischief  ;  in  fact,  they 
serve  merely  as  additional  indications  of  the  severity  of  the  attack 
of  whooping-cough;  but  they  do  not  add  to  its  risks  nor  entail  modi- 
fications of  treatment. 

The  frequent  recurrence  of  vomiting  is  much  more  important, 
since  this  so  seriously  threatens  nutrition.  Some  children  vomit 
during  every  fit  of  coughing,  the  sickness  resulting  in  part  from 
the  reflex  irritation  of  the  pharynx  and  in  part  from  the  violent 
spasmodic  movements  of  the  abdominal  muscles.  Sickness  is  most 
likely  to  occur  when  the  attack  of  coughing  commences  during  the 
time  that  food  is  being  taken,  and  this  result  is  favored  when  the 
food  is  of  an  unsuitable  character.  The  diet  in  these  cases  should 
be  of  a  fluid  nature,  and  it  should  be  as  nutritious  as  possible.  When, 
however,  the  stomach  has  been  emptied  during  the  paroxysm  of 
cough,  it  is  advisable  to  give  nourishment  so  soon  as  the  attack  is 
over,  so  as  to  favor  its  retention  and  absorption  ;  but  if  digestion 
appears  much  impaired,  and  if  the  cough  is  very  frequent,  it  is  de- 
sirable to  promote  absorption  by  giving  the  food  in  a  peptonized 
form,  and  perhaps  to  favor  digestion  and  to  counteract  depression 
by  the  addition  of  a  few  drops  of  brandy. 


CHAPTEE   XIX. 

SPECIFIC   INFECTIOUS   DlBEkSB^—Gotitinued. 

Typhoid  Fever  {Enteric  Fever,  Typhus  Abdominalis) — Treatment  of  Associated 
Symptoms :  Hyperpyrexia,  Diarrhoea,  Nervous  Symptoms,  Hemorrliage,  Per- 
foration, Convalescence — Typhus  Fever  (  Typhus  Exanlhematicus) — Eelapsing 
Fever  {Febris  ys.  Typhus  Becitrre/is)— Epidemic  Influenza  {La  Ori.ppe). 

Typhoid  Fever  [Enterie  Fever,  Typhus  Abdominalis).  The  treat- 
ment of  typhoid  fever  has  been  very  largely  influenced  by  the  in- 
creased knowledge  of  the  pathology  of  this  disease ;  the  recognition 
of  its  dependence  upon  the  introduction  of  Eberth's  bacillus  renders 
the  rational  treatment  of  the  disease  more  satisfactory,  even  when 
the  symptoms  may  be  so  mild  as  scarcely  to  call  for  special  treat- 
ment. The  pathological  changes  due  to  infection  with  this  bacillus, 
the  lesions  in  the  lower  part  of  the  small  intestine,  the  enlargement 
of  the  spleen,  and  the  characteristic  course  of  the  temperature,  are 
the  features  which  are  ordinarily  present  in  every  case,  and  are  so 
well  known  as  to  need  no  detailed  description  here.  The  associa- 
tion of  such  symptoms  as  headache,  nausea,  epistaxis,  and  occasion- 
ally much  sense  of  fatigue  may  mark  individual  cases. 

Among  other  symptoms  which  may  be  present  or  absent,  either 
in  the  individual  case  or  occasionally  in  the  course  of  epidemics, 
may  be  mentioned  the  characteristic  typhoid  rash  of  rose-colored 
spots  scattered  over  the  abdomen  and  over  the  lower  part  of  the 
chest,  the  occurrence  of  diarrhoea,  which  is  ordinarily  associated 
with  some  tympanitic  distention,  and  the  development  of  marked 
indications  of  weakness,  constituting  the  so-called  typhoid  state. 

Any  of  the  above  symptoms  may  perhaps  call  for  modifications 
of  the  general  plan  of  treatment  which  is  indicated  by  the  presence 
of  the  bacillus  ;  and,  further,  the  treatment  must  be  radically  changed 
whenever  marked  complications  occur,  such  as  severe  and  protracted 
diarrhoea,  intestinal  hemorrhage,  perforation,  hyperpyrexia,  second- 
ary congestions — as,  for  example,  of  the  lung — or  progressive  car- 
diac weakness,  or  rather  symptoms  which  may  interrupt  the  progress 
of  the  disease  or  occur  even  during  the  stage  of  convalescence.  The 
treatment,  therefore,  of  typhoid  fever  must  naturally  be  divided  into 


TYPHOID  FEVEB.  445 

the  hygienic,  dietetic,  and  medicinal  treatment  of  simple  uncom- 
plicated cases,  and  the  special  forms  of  treatment  demanded  by  the 
various  associated  symptoms,  complications,  or  sequelse. 

Prior  to  the  recognition  of  the  dependence  of  this  disease  upon 
bacillary  growth,  it  was  well-known  that  numerous  cases  of  typhoid 
fever  ran  through  a  perfectly  simple  course,  independently  of  any 
treatment  other  than  the  modification  of  hygienic  and  dietetic  condi- 
tions ;  and,  in  fact,  in  children  or  young  adults,  provided  that  reli- 
ance can  be  placed  upon  the  nurses,  there  is  frequently  no  call  for 
the  use  of  medicines  until  the  stage  of  convalescence  has  been  reached. 
On  the  other  hand,  however,  in  some  instances  medicinal  treatment 
undoubtedly  appears  to  modify  the  severity  of  the  attack  and  even 
to  shorten  its  duration. 

The  hygienic  measures  mainly  concern  those  brought  into  contact 
with  the  patient,  since  the  possible  spread  of  the  disease  is  largely 
under  their  control.  The  selection  of  the  sick-room,  its  tempera- 
ture, light,  and  ventilation,  the  arrangement  of  the  bed,  and  the 
necessary  disinfectant  measures  have  already  been  dealt  with  in  the 
section  on  the  General  Management  of  Specific  Infectious  Diseases 
(P-419).      _ 

The  judicious  control  of  a  patient  with  typhoid  fever  is  so  im- 
portant that  the  care  should  never  be  left  in  the  hands  of  friends. 
One,  two,  or  more  nurses  should  be  engaged,  according  to  the 
severity  of  the  case.  The  employment  of  nurses  is  the  more  im- 
portant, since  in  this  disease  abrupt  changes  of  symptoms  may  indi- 
cate the  need  for  prompt  alteration  of  treatment ;  and,  moreover, 
even  in  mild  cases,  a  nurse  is,  as  a  rule,  more  to  be  trusted  to  with- 
stand the  patient's  entreaties  for  food  during  convalescence. 

Since  the  spread  of  this  disease  is  effected  by  the  excreta,  great 
care  must  be  taken  to  disinfect  the  motions  and  to  insure  cleanliness. 
Under  judicious  management  there  is  but  little  fear  of  the  spread  of 
the  disease,  either  to  those  who  are  engaged  in  nursing  or  to  others 
with  whom  the  attendants  may  come  in  contact.  But  since  the 
body  and  the  clothes  may  become  soiled  by  excreta,  it  is  always 
desirable  to  have  near  the  bedside  some  disinfectant  solution,  as, 
for  example,  a  solution  of  carbolic  acid  or  of  corrosive  mercuric 
chloride,  with  which  the  hands  may  be  cleansed  after  handling  the 
patient. 

Even  when  the  case  is  not  marked  by  high  temperature,  comfort 
may  be  increased  and  risks  of  spread  of  the  disease  may  be  dimin- 


446  SPECIFIC  INFEOTIO  US  DISEASES. 

ished  by  daily  sponging  with  a  moderately  warm  disinfectant  solu- 
tion. 

It  is  also  necessary  to  have  a  mackintosh  sheet  at  hand  in  case 
measures  for  the  reduction  of  temperature  have  to  be  undertaken. 
Further,  inasmuch  as  headache  frequently  forms  a  prominent  feature 
during  the  early  days,  it  is  well  to  have  the  hair  cut  short,  so  as  to 
facilitate  the  application  of  cold  to  the  head  if  necessary.  In  female 
patients  this  measure  may  perhaps  be  delayed,  except  in  severe 
cases,  though  there  is  but  little  advantage  in  the  delay,  since  ordi- 
narily the  hair  falls  out  during  the  course  of  the  fever  or  during 
protracted  convalescence. 

During  the  fever  the  diet  requires  constant  care,  and  the  chief 
indications  are  the  avoidance  of  solids  and  also  of  highly  concen- 
trated forms  of  diet.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  protest  against 
the  employment  of  strong  meat  essences  is  well  founded,  and  that 
although  the  fever  necessarily  reduces  the  strength,  a  large  element 
in  the  altered  appearance  of  the  patient  is  due  to  the  rapid  loss  of 
liquid  which  ensues,  either  as  the  result  of  high  temperature  and 
increased  evaporation  from  the  skin  and  from  the  lung,  or  still  fur- 
ther as  the  result  of  profuse  diarrhoea.  This  liquid  must  be  replaced, 
if  possible,  and  this  affords  an  indication  for  an  increased  amount  of 
water  in  the  dietary  rather  than  for  the  use  of  a  highly  concentrated 
diet.  On  the  other  hand,  the  lesion  in  the  intestine  is  a  sufficient 
argument  against  the  use  of  solid  forms  of  diet  which  leave  indigest- 
ible waste  material  to  act  as  an  irritant,  and  so  promote  diarrhoea. 
The  best  form  of  diet,  therefore,  in  typhoid  fever  is  one  which  in- 
cludes milk  and  beef -tea,  both  being  given  in  tolerably  dilute  con- 
dition, so  as  to  promote  the  introduction  of  the  necessary  quantity 
of  liquid.  During  the  height  of  the  fever  the  milk  and  beef-tea 
should  be  given  alternately  every  two  hours  in  mild  cases,  every 
hour  in  severe  cases,  and  the  bulk  should  amount  to  about  4  pints 
in  the  twenty-four  hours.  Of  this  quantity  from  2  to  3  pints  should 
consist  of  milk,  and  the  remaining  supply  of  liquid  may  consist 
either  of  water  with  which  the  milk  or  beef-tea  is  diluted,  or  of 
barley  water,  which  may  be  used  for  the  same  purpose. 

The  proportion  of  milk  as  well  as  that  of  beef- tea  must  be  regu- 
lated to  some  extent  by  the  digestive  powers  of  the  individual.  It 
is  sometimes  found  that  the  milk  is  scarcely  digested,  and  gives  rise 
to  white,  curdy  motions.  Under  these  circumstances  it  may  be  de- 
sirable, or  even  necessary,  to  discontinue  the  employment  of  milk, 


TYPHOID  FEVER.  447 

more  particularly  if  the  curd  in  the  motion  is  found  in  connection 
with  diarrhoea.  For  a  time  this  symptom  may  be  avoided  by  giving 
chicken  broth  well  diluted,  or  beef -tea,  or  attempts  may  be  made  to 
use  whey  instead  of  milk  ;  but  in  cases  of  severe  diarrhoea,  still 
better  results  may  be  obtained  from  the  white  of  egg  mixture, 
which  may  be  rendered  more  beneficial  by  the  addition  of  small 
quantities  of  brandy.  In  the  ordinary  course  the  amount  of  liquid 
taken  every  hour  should  be  from  3  to  4  ounces,  whether  tliis  con- 
sists of  milk  diluted  with  barley  water  or  of  similarly  diluted  beef- 
tea  or  chicken  broth ;  if  the  other  symptoms  indicate  the  need  for 
stimulants,  these  are  best  given  with  the  ordinary  nourishment  in 
small  doses  distributed  over  the  twenty-four  hours. 

During  the  height  of  the  fever  it  is  undesirable  to  employ  any 
other  diet  than  that  above  indicated.  Certainly,  it  is  somewhat 
perilous  to  administer  any  solids  during  the  time  that  ulceration  is 
proceeding  in  the  small  intestine,  and  the  peril  is  still  greater  during 
the  third  and  fourth  weeks  of  the  fever,  when  the  sloughs  are  sepa- 
rating, and  risks  of  perforation  and  of  hemorrhage  are  thereby 
increased. 

As  the  patient  progresses  and  the  fever  indicates  the  well-known 
oscillations  characteristic  of  the  termination  of  the  acute  stage  of 
the  attack,  complaint  will  probably  be  made  of  considerable  hunger 
and  of  the  insufficient  diet,  but  all  entreaties  for  more  food  should 
be  resisted  until  the  temperature  has  for  ten  days  or  a  fortnight  been 
at  the  normal  point  or  subnormal.  From  time  to  time  it  has  been 
recommended  that  with  the  fall  of  temperature  a  more  liberal  diet 
should  at  once  be  commenced,  and  successful  cases  have  been  re- 
ported in  support  of  this  mode  of  treatment.  It  has  also  been 
stated  that  it  is  essential  to  feed  up  the  patient  as  soon  as  conva- 
lescence commences ;  of  course,  the  value  of  this  statement  depends 
upon  the  date  at  which  convalescence  is  to  be  considered  as  initiated, 
since  obviously  it  is  impossible  to  consider  that  in  all  cases  solid 
food  may  be  taken  without  risk  when  the  temperature  first  reaches 
the  normal.  Doubtless  some  cases  may  do  well  even  with  this  early 
resort  to  solid  food,  but  the  fall  of  temperature  is  not  necessarily  an 
indication  that  the  ulcerative  process  in  the  intestine  has  ceased,  still 
less  that  the  surface  has  healed. 

Reference  has  already  been  made  to  the  administration  of  alcohol 
in  typhoid  fever  and  to  the  advisability  of  distributing  the  doses 
evenly  over  the  twenty-four  hours.      In  many  cases,  and  espe- 


448  SPECIFIC  INFECTIOUS  DISEASES. 

cially  in  young  adults,  no  stimulant  is  required  ;  but  during  the 
stage  of  convalescence,  digestion  and  appetite  appear  to  be  pro- 
moted by  small  amounts  of  alcohol.  The  indications  for  the  admin- 
istration of  stimulants  during  the  fever  are  to  be  found  chiefly  in 
the  character  of  the  pulse.  When  the  pulse  becomes  weak,  irregu- 
lar, and  rapid,  out  of  all  proportion  to  the  temperature,  stimulants 
will  probably  be  of  service,  and  especially  in  those  cases  in  which 
these  alterations  in  the  pulse  are  associated  with  weakness  of  the 
nervous  system,  indicated  by  delirium  or  by  sleeplessness. 

The  character  of  the  tongue  is  sometimes  mentioned  as  calling 
for  the  use  of  stimulants,  the  dryness  and  tremor,  with  much  brown 
fur,  being  considered  special  indications.  This  is  occasionally  true. 
I  have  often  seen  the  appearance  of  the  tongue  improve  greatly  after 
the  moderate  employment  of  stimulants ;  but,  on  the  other  hand, 
there  has  sometimes  been  strong  reason  for  believing  that  the  above- 
mentioned  characters  of  the  tongue  were  perhaps  attributable  to  the 
employment  of  alcohol  in  overdoses.  It  is  better,  therefore,  to  look 
to  the  pulse  and  to  the  mental  condition  of  the  patient  than  to  the 
tongue  for  indications  for  prescribing  stimulants. 

During  the  height  of  the  fever  the  amount  administered  may  re- 
quire to  be  from  4  to  8  ounces,  and,  as  in  other  diseases  necessitating 
the  employment  of  whiskey  or  brandy,  it  is  desirable  to  reduce  the 
amount  given  at  the  earliest  possible  moment.  There  is  one  symp- 
tom, however,  which  is  frequently  very  amenable  to  the  use  of  stimu- 
lants— namely,  sleeplessness,  which  in  an  exaggerated  form  has  been 
described  under  the  name  of  coma  vigil.  The  patient  lies  flat  on 
his  back,  with  the  eyes  partly  open,  perhaps  with  some  slight  mut- 
tering delirium,  but  otherwise  without  any  complaint,  and  this  con- 
dition of  sleeplessness  may  be  continued  for  many  hours  or  even 
days,  unless  interrupted  by  the  use  of  some  stimulant  such  as  whiskey 
or  brandy.  In  such  cases,  instead  of  distributing  the  alcohol  evenly 
over  the  twenty-four  hours,  small  doses  may  be  given  during  the 
day  and  a  larger  dose  administered  at  night-time,  but  even  then  the 
amount  given  in  the  single  dose  should  not  exceed  from  1  to  2  ounces. 

The  form  of  stimulant  demands  a  passing  reference.  Daring  the 
fever  the  greatest  amount  of  benefit  appears  to  result  from  the  use 
of  good  brandy  or  good  whiskey,  which  may  be  taken  without  any 
inconvenience  if  a  sufficiently  small  dose  is  well  diluted.  During 
convalescence,  on  the  other  hand,  the  alcohol  should  preferably  be 
administered  at  the  time  of  taking  solid  food,  and  since  the  stimu- 


TYPHOID  FEVER.  449 

lants  already  mentioned  might  at  this  time  cause  some  distaste  for 
food,  or  even  provoke  nausea,  it  is  better  to  give  champagne  or  port 
wine,  either  of  which  may  be  more  readily  taken. 

Mention  has  already  been  made  of  the  comparative  unimpor- 
tance of  medicinal  treatment  in  many  simple,  uncomplicated,  mild 
forms  of  typhoid  fever ;  but,  having  regard  to  the  pathology  of 
this  disease,  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  advisability  of  employing 
measures  calculated  to  reduce  the  activity  of  the  typhoid  bacillus, 
and  this  forms  the  rationale  of  the  antiseptic  treatment  of  typhoid 
fever.  Apart  from  these  measures,  however,  when  the  onset  of  the 
disease  is  marked  by  constipation,  the  amount  of  headache  may  to 
some  extent  be  reduced  by  the  cautious  employment  of  a  saline 
purge,  and  this  may  be  followed  by  the  administration  of  a  simple 
diaphoretic  and  diuretic  mixture,  containing,  for  example,  spirit  of 
nitrous  ether  and  solution  of  ammonium  acetate.  There  is  no  advan- 
tage, however,  in  employing  large  doses  of  these  remedies,  since  it 
is  improbable  that  they  serve  to  reduce  the  temperature  or  to  curtail 
the  course  of  the  disease.  The  utmost  advantage  that  can  follow 
their  employment  lies  in  the  removal  of  nitrogenous  waste,  and  in 
the  substitution  of  a  moderate  degree  of  perspiration  for  the  dry, 
harsh  heat  of  the  fever.  If  diaphoretic  remedies  are  given  lavishly, 
they  may  serve  to  produce  considerable  perspiration  of  an  exhaust- 
ing character. 

One  form  of  antiseptic  treatment  consists  in  the  administration  of 
a  dilute  solution  of  free  chlorine  water,  to  which  other  remedies  may 
be  added,  such  as  quinine.  My  colleague,  Dr.  Burney  Yeo,'  who 
has  employed  this  mixture  largely,  gives  the  following  directions  for 
the  preparation  of  this  solution  : 

"Into  a  12-ounce  bottle  put  30  grains  of  powdered  potassium 
chlorate,  and  pour  on  it  60  minims  of  strong  hydrochloric  acid. 
Chlorine  gas  is  at  once  liberated.  Fit  a  cork  into  the  mouth  of  the 
bottle  and  keep  it  closed  until  it  has  become  filled  with  the  greenish- 
yellow  gas.  To  hasten  this  you  must  keep  shaking  the  mixture  of 
acid  and  chlorate.  Then  pour  water  into  a  bottle,  little  by  little, 
closing  the  bottle,  and  well  shaking  at  each  addition  until  the  bottle 
is  filled.  You  will  then  have  a  solntion  of  free  chlorine  together 
with  some  undecomposed  chlorate  of  potash  and  hydrochloric  acid, 
and  probably  one  or  two  by-products. 

^  Medical  Treatment,  p.  635. 
29 


450  SPECIFIC  INFECTIO  US  DISEASES. 

"  If  the  bottle  is  filled  too  rapidly  with  water,  the  chlorine  will  be 
driven  out  of  the  bottle  by  the  water  instead  of  being  dissolved  in  it. 

"To  12  ounces  of  this  solution,  for  an  adult,  we  add  24  to  36 
grains  of  quinine  and  an  ounce  of  syrup  of  orange-peel,  and  we 
give  an  ounce  every  two,  three,  or  four  hours,  according  to  the 
severity  of  the  case — that  will  be  from  12  to  36  grains  of  quinine 
in  twenty-four  hours." 

In  the  cases  in  which  I  have  employed  this  solution  I  can  con- 
firm Dr.  Yeo's  experience  that  the  tongue  ordinarily  becomes  rapidly 
clean,  and  that  the  offensive  character  of  the  evacuations  frequently 
disappears.  It  will  be  seen  that  in  this  solution  the  amount  of 
quinine  which  is  given  is  comparatively  small,  and,  further,  that  it 
is  distributed  over  the  twenty-four  hours.  Quinine  has,  however, 
often  been  employed  in  larger  single  doses,  with  the  view  of  reducing 
temperature.  I  have  known  20  grains  to  be  given  with  this  object, 
in  two  doses  within  an  hour  of  each  other,  but  the  quinine  was  then 
administered  with  milk  instead  of  being  dissolved  with  an  acid,  and 
from  numerous  observations  made  in  this  and  other  diseases  I  have 
little  doubt  that  the  activity  of  quinine  is  considerably  diminished 
by  this  mode  of  administration,  so  that,  although  a  large  dose  was 
given,  the  patient  did  not  experience  the  full  physiological  effect 
which  would  ordinarily  be  produced  by  this  dose. 

Of  other  antiseptics  which  have  been  recommended  the  following, 
which  are  referred  to  in  the  Year-Book  of  Treatment  for  1899,  pp. 
153  and  154,  may  be  mentioned  : 

Asaprol  is  a  naphthol  monosulphate  of  calcium.  It  is  highly 
recommended  by  Dr.  Clement  Ferreira.^  He  gives  30  to  45  grains 
daily.  It  cleans  the  tongue  and  lessens  tympanites  and  diarrhoea. 
The  substance  is  an  antiseptic,  but  Dr.  Ferreira  recommends  its  use 
not  only  on  this  account,  but  also  because  it  exercises  an  agglutin- 
ating action  on  the  bacilli  of  cultures,  and,  therefore,  possibly  exer- 
cises a  beneficial  influence  on  the  malady. 

Dr.  J.  C  Potter^  recommends  5  minims  of  compound  tincture  of 
benzoin  every  two  hours  in  typhoid  fever ;  after  twenty-four  hours 
the  diarrhoea  decreases  and  the  terhperature  falls.  If  the  diarrhoea 
is  not  controlled  the  dose  should  be  doubled. 

Dr.  Bramwell  ^  advocates  the  use  of  salol  in  the  powdered  form, 

1  Bulletin  General  de  Therap.,  October  23,  1898. 
^  British  Medical  Journal,  November  27,  1897. 
=*  Ibid.,  1897,  vol.  ii.  p.  1214. 


TYPHOID  FEVEB.  451 

not  in  tabloids,  in  doses  of  5  to  10  grains  (according  to  age)  every 
four  hours  until  the  urine  is  tinged,  when  the  dose  is  diminished, 
giving  only  sufficient  to  maintain  the  faint  coloration  of  the  urine. 
Dr.  Bramwell  believes  that  in  several  mild  cases  the  disease  has 
been  aborted  by  salol,  and  cases  of  greater  severity  have  passed 
through  a  mild  and  uncomplicated  course  under  salol  treatment. 
In  addition  to  this  treatment,  however,  in  severe  cases  he  employs 
cold  packs  and  sponging  during  the  first  few  days.  Dr.  Bramwell 
bases  his  statements  on  ten  years'  use  of  the  drug. 

Brigade  Surgeon  Lieut. -Colonel  Quill  ^  recommends  the  internal 
administration  of  the  following  mixture  : 

K. — Acidi  carbolici  liquefacti TTLxxxyj. 

Tincturse  chloroformi  compositfe  (B.  P. )         .         .  ^ij. 

Tincturfe  cardamomi  compositfe      .         .         .         .  gij. 

Syrupi  aurantii       .         .         .         .         .         .         •  3J- 

AquEe  chloroformi .         .         .         .         .       q.  s.  ad  ^xij. 

One  ounce,  with  an  equal  quantity  of  iced  water,  to  be  taken  every 
second  or  third  hour,  immediately  after  food.  "  In  mild  cases  of 
enteric  fever  five  or  six  doses  of  the  above  mixture  are  given  in  the 
twenty-four  hours,  while  in  severe  cases  ten  doses  are  given.  It  is 
advisable  to  continue  its  use  in  from  three  to  five  doses  daily  for  at 
least  a  week  after  the  temperature  has  fallen  to  normal."  Compound 
tincture  of  chloroform  in  the  above  prescription  is  very  similar  to  the 
liquid  known  in  England  and  the  United  States  as  "  chlorodyne." 

It  should  be  added  that  when  relapses  occur  during  convalescence 
the  ordinary  diet  and  treatment  of  an  acute  attack  must  be  resumed  ; 
the  pyrexia  and  diarrhoea  may,  however,  require  the  special  treat- 
ment described  in  the  next  section.  The  risks  of  hemorrhage  and 
perforation  are  greatly  increased  during  a  relapse,  and,  even  in  the  ab- 
sence of  such  complications,  convalescence  is  always  greatly  retarded^ 

Treatment  of  Associated  Symptoms.  The  commonest  symptoms 
which  call  for  special  treatment  are  hyperpyrexia  and  diarrhoea, 
and  these  may  occur  Avith  but  little  warning  as  mere  exaggerations 
of  milder  symptoms  which  have  attracted  but  little  notice.  So  long 
as  the  temperature  in  the  early  days  remains  between  103°  and 
104°  F.,  and  only  reaches  the  latter  point  occasionally,  there  is  no 
special  need  for  attempting  to  modify  this  temperature  ;  but  if  the 
temperature  rises  to  105°  F.  or  higher,  and  does  not  at  once  fall,  it 
will  be  advisable  to  employ  some  measures  for  reducing  the  height 

'  British  Medical  Journal,  May,  1898. 


452  SPECIFIC  INFECTIOUS  DISEASES. 

of  the  fever.  The  reduction  of  temperature  formed  the  subject  of 
discussion  at  one  of  the  recent  meetings  of  the  British  Medical  Asso- 
ciation, and  all  who  took  part  in  this  discussion  were  agreed  on  the 
undesirability  of  employing  any  of  the  newer  depressant  antipy- 
retics ;  and,  while  fully  recognizing  the  importance  of  reducing  the 
high  temperature,  it  was  felt  that  this  could  be  effected  with  a  greater 
degree  of  safety  and  of  comfort  by  the  application  of  cold  than  by 
the  administration  of  drugs. 

The  temperature  may  be  lowered  in  various  ways,  either  by  the 
use  of  the  cold  bath  or  by  sponging  the  patient  freely  with  tepid  or 
cold  water,  or  even  by  friction  with  cloths  soaked  in  ice-cold  water, 
or  with  cloths  containing  lumps  of  ice  of  convenient  shape.  Of 
these  various  methods  the  bath  is  undoubtedly  the  quickest  in 
action,  but  it  involves  many  inconveniences.  Foremost  among 
these  is  the  disturbance  of  the  patient  in  his  removal  from  the  bed 
to  the  bath.  It  is,  perhaps,  scarcely  necessary  to  indicate  that  it  is 
essential  that  the  patient  should  be  lifted  into  the  bath  with  the 
minimum  amount  of  movement  or  of  muscular  exertion  on  his  part. 
The  temperature  of  the  bath  may  conveniently  be  at  100°,  102°,  or 
103°  F.  when  the  patient  is  first  immersed,  and  the  temperature  may 
subsequently  be  gradually  lowered  by  the  addition  of  cold  water,  or, 
if  more  rapid  diminution  of  temperature  is  desirable,  by  dissolving 
lumps  of  ice  in  the  bath. 

In  employing  the  bath  it  is  necessary  to  take  the  patient's  tem- 
perature from  time  to  time,  and  to  remove  him  to  his  bed  again  so 
soon  as  the  temperature,  taken  in  the  rectum,  indicates  a  fall  of  from 
two  to  three  degrees.  It  is  also  essential  that  the  patient  should  be 
removed  from  the  bath  and  stimulants  should  be  administered  if 
any  indications  of  collapse  occur,  as  shown  by  failure  of  the  pulse 
or  by  blueness  of  the  surface.  The  cold-bath  treatment  of  typhoid 
fever  is  undoubtedly  very  severe,  and  is  only  applicable  to  patients 
who  have  been  previously  of  a  robust  type.  In  delicate  individuals, 
especially  in  females,  the  cold  bath  is  apt  to  be  followed  by  very 
great  depression. 

Under  favorable  conditions  the  initial  fall  of  temperature  may  be 
continued  for  a  few  hours  after  the  patient  has  been  removed  from 
the  bath ;  the  temperature  then  commonly  rises  again,  though  it 
does  not  attain  the  previous  height. 

Sponging  the  whole  surface  of  the  body  with  tepid  or  cold  water  is 
frequently  almost  as  beneficial  as  immersion  in  a  cold  bath,  and  it 


TYPHOID  FEVER.  453 

has  the  advantage  of  involvmg  no  disturbance  of  the  patient,  and  if 
performed  by  two  nurses  it  can  be  carried  out  almost  as  rapidly  as 
the  bath.  The  temperature  of  the  water  used  under  these  circum- 
stances must  be  dependent  upon  the  severity  of  the  fever.  Tepid 
sponging  will  often  reduce  the  temperature  sufficiently  in  mild  cases 
of  hyperpyrexia,  but  in  severe  cases  the  temperature  of  the  water 
may  be  lowered  almost  to  freezing-point,  so  as  to  obtain  a  more 
rapid  lowering  of  the  fever. 

Even  during  this  process,  however,  some  degree  of  collapse  may 
result,  and  may  call  for  the  administration  of  stimulants,  which 
should  always  be  at  hand  when  dealing  with  hyperpyrexia. 

A  moderate  degree  of  diarrhoea  frequently  occurs  in  the  course 
of  every  case  of  typhoid  fever,  and  it  was  at  one  time  held  that  this 
symptom  was  to  l)e  regarded  as  a  conservative  process  by  which  the 
poison  of  the  disease  might  be  eliminated,  and  on  this  hypothesis  it 
was  recommended  that  no  steps  should  be  taken  to  check  the  diar- 
rhoea. It  is  at  present  believed,  however,  that  although  a  moderate 
amount  of  diarrhoea  may  do  no  harm,  the  chief  indication  for  adopt- 
ing measures  for  its  arrest  is  to  be  found  in  the  presence  of  undi- 
gested curd  or  milk  in  the  motions,  and  this  undigested  food  will 
commonly  make  its  appearance  when  the  diarrhoea  is  excessive  and 
when  the  patient  appears  to  be  exhausted  by  this  symptom.  The 
measures  to  be  adopted  will  accordingly  have  two  distinct  objects  in 
view,  one  the  modification  of  the  dietary,  so  as  to  facilitate  the  due 
absorption  of  food,  and  thus  to  prevent  it  acting  as  an  irritant  in 
the  course  of  the  intestine,  the  other  to  promote  greater  regularity 
of  peristaltic  action  by  the  use  of  various  sedatives,  which  for  this 
purpose  are  to  be  employed  by  the  rectum. 

The  modifications  of  diet  may  consist  merely  in  the  greater  dilu- 
tion and  in  the  peptonizing  of  milk  previously  to  its  employment, 
or,  if  diarrhoea  is  severe,  it  may  be  advisable  to  check  the  adminis- 
tration of  milk  and  to  substitute  either  weak  beef -tea  or  a  mixture 
of  egg  albumin. 

The  medicinal  treatment  which  gives  the  best  results  consists  in 
the  employment  of  enemata  containing  opium,  either  as  laudanum,, 
or  as  the  compound  ipecacuanha  powder.  These  may  conveniently 
be  given  with  mucilage  of  starch,  and  if  greater  action  is  required 
small  quantities  of  tannic  acid  may  be  added.  The  most  conve- 
nient time,  perhaps,  for  administering  the  enema  is  after  each  liquid 
motion.     These  measures,  as  a  rule,  suffice  to  check  the  severity  of 


454  SPECIFIC  INFECTIO  US  DISEASES. 

the  diarrhoea,  so  that  it  is  rarely  necessary  to  give  astringents  by 
the  mouth.  Should  the  diarrhoea,  however,  continue  in  spite  of 
these  remedies,  it  is  advisable  to  increase  the  amount  of  stimulant 
that  is  being  administered,  and  sometimes  also  to  use  a  mixture 
either  of  bismuth  subnitrate  or  carbonate,  or  the  chalk  mixture, 
adding  to  either  of  these  small  quantities  of  laudanum. 

The  treatment  of  the  nervous  symptoms  which  may  occur  in  the 
course  of  typhoid  fever  has  already  been  incidentally  mentioned. 
The  prominent  symptoms  consist  of  intense  headache,  sleeplessness, 
and  delirium,  and  to  these  should  perhaps  be  added  deafness,  which 
may  occasionally  be  very  great.  This  last  symptom,  however,  does 
not  call  for  treatment,  and  in  many  respects  it  appears  to  be  some- 
what advantageous,  since  sleep  is  less  likely  to  be  disturbed  by  noise. 
Most  of  the  nervous  symptoms  above  mentioned  call  for  the  increased 
administration  of  stimulants,  and  when  there  is  much  sleeplessness, 
in  spite  of  stimulants,  it  is  sometimes  necessary  to  employ  some  mild 
hypnotic,  such  as  chloral  hydrate,  potassium  bromide,  sulphonal,  or 
paraldehyde. 

Foremost  among  the  complications  must  be  mentioned  intestinal 
hemorrhage,  which  may  occur  at  any  stage  in  the  course  of  the  dis- 
ease, although  perhaps  it  is  most  frequent  during  the  third  week, 
especially  if  there  is  much  diarrhoea.  The  occurrence  of  hemor- 
rhage is  indicated,  prior  to  alteration  in  the  appearance  of  the  stools, 
by  symptoms  of  collapse,  and  frequently  by  a  fall  of  temperature 
and  by  an  increased  rapidity  of  the  pulse,  which  becomes  weak  and 
thready.  This  complication  entails  the  adoption  of  measures  already 
indicated  in  the  treatment  of  diarrhoea,  and  in  addition  it  may  be 
mentioned  that  it  is  essential  that  the  patient  be  kept  absolutely  at 
rest. 

Applications  of  ice-bags  over  the  abdomen  are  sometimes  recom- 
mended ;  they  are,  however,  contraindicated  by  the  amount  of  de- 
pression and  by  the  extent  to  which  they  impair  the  vitality  of 
subjacent  viscera.  Short  of  the  administration  of  strong  astringents, 
the  best  treatment  lies  in  insuring  rest  for  the  intestine  by  refraining 
from  the  administration  of  food  by  the  mouth  and  also  by  the  use 
of  enemata  containing  opium.  Nutrient  enemata  are  sometimes 
employed  in  this  condition,  but  the  common  association  with  diar- 
rhoea renders  them  of  very  little  service,  and  accordingly  it  becomes 
essential  that  the  strength  should  be  maintained  by  employing  nutri- 
ment whicli  leaves  but  the  slightest  residue ;  and  this  is  the  condi- 


TYPHOID  FEVER.  455 

tion,  indeed,  that  forms  the  chief  indication  for  the  use  of  any  of  the 
concentrated  meat  juices,  small  quantities  of  which  may  be  given 
from  time  to  time  with  iced  water. 

The  astringents  which  have  proved  to  be  of  service  under  these 
circumstances  are  turpentine,  which  is  conveniently  given  in  cap- 
sules containing  two  or  three  minims,  and  copper  sulphate,  which 
may  be  used  as  a  pill,  in  doses  of  from  J  to  1  grain.  Tincture  of 
hamamelis  is  also  sometimes  very  efficacious.  Other  astringents 
are  often  recommended,  as,  for  example,  tannic  acid  or  gallic  acid, 
but  Avhichever  may  be  selected  it  should  be  employed  well  diluted, 
so  as  to  interfere  as  little  as  possible  with  the  digestive  functions  of 
the  stomach. 

Perforation  is  a  still  more  serious  complication  which  is,  happily, 
not  of  very  frequent  occurrence.  The  indications  are  sudden,  severe 
abdominal  pain,  collapse,  weakness  of  the  pulse,  and  fall  of  tem- 
perature, the  symptoms  differing  from  those  of  severe  hemorrhage 
chiefly  in  the  amount  of  abdominal  pain  and  in  the  subsequent 
development  of  peritonitis.  Signs  of  collapse  always  call  for  the 
immediate  employment  of  opium  or  morphine  in  full  dose.  Some 
practitioners  are  of  the  opinion  that  this  remedy  affords  the  only 
chance  of  recovery,  but  a  more  suitable  method  of  treatment  is  to 
attempt  by  surgical  measures  to  find  the  site  of  perforation,  to  close 
the  opening  in  the  intestine,  and  to  wash  out  of  the  peritoneal  cavity 
any  of  the  intestinal  contents  which  might  have  escaped.  This  in- 
volves the  performance  of  a  serious  operation,  but  the  risks  incurred 
are  far  less  than  the  risks  of  inactivity. 

The  results  are  not  always  as  successful  as  one  would  desire,  even 
when  the  surgeon  has  been  fortunate  enough  to  find  the  site  of  per- 
foration comparatively  readily ;  thus,  for  example,  I  may  mention 
that  Mr.  Watson  Cheyne  recently  operated  upon  a  patient  of  mine, 
and  although  he  was  able  to  do  so  within  a  little  over  an  hour  after 
perforation  had  occurred,  and  although  the  perforation  was  found 
immediately  below  the  abdominal  wound,  yet,  in  spite  of  the  utmost 
care,  the  patient  died  within  three  days  with  symptoms  of  collapse. 
The  immediate  result  of  the  operation  in  this  case  was  to  cause  con- 
siderable relief,  and  during  the  second  day  there  was  so  much  im- 
provement in  the  appearance  and  in  the  character  of  the  pulse  that 
we  were  somewhat  hopeful  of  the  ultimate  issue.  It  was  found 
subsequently,  however,  that  the  ulcerated  patches  in  the  intestine 
were  very  deep,  so  that  even  had  he  recovered  from  the  first  opera- 


456  SPECIFIC  INFECTIO  US  DISEASES. 

tion,  in  all  probability  one  or  more  of  the  other  ulcers  would  subse- 
quently have  given  way. 

In  considering  the  surgical  treatment  of  perforation  it  should  be 
remembered  that  the  chances  of  success  depend  greatly  upon  the 
possibility  of  early  operation,  since  if  from  any  cause  surgical  meas- 
ures are  postponed,  there  will  be  greater  difficulty  of  finding  the 
perforation,  owing  to  the  extensive  peritonitis  which  speedily  de- 
velops. 

When  the  course  of  the  fever  has  been  particularly  severe,  either 
with  high  temperature  or  with  frequent  diarrhoea,  indications  of  car- 
diac failure  may  present  themselves,  the  chief  being  the  rapidity  and 
irregularity  of  the  pulse,  and  perhaps  also  tendency  to  faint  after 
any  slight  exertion  or  movement.  This  condition  is  to  be  dealt 
with  partly  by  the  administration  of  brandy  or  whiskey  and  partly 
by  the  employment  of  other  cardiac  stimulants,  such  as  strychnine 
and  digitalis,  which  may  be  given  subcutaneously,  or  by  the  use  of 
caffeine,  either  in  mixture  with  digitalis  or  as  strong  coffee,  which 
frequently  serves  to  increase  the  force  of  the  heart's  action. 

Treatment  during  convalescence  is  chiefly  to  be  dictated  by  the 
desire  to  avoid  doing  harm  through  the  too  early  administration  of 
solid  food  or  through  allowing  the  patient  to  incur  risks  of  perfora- 
tion by  resorting  too  soon  to  muscular  movements,  even  in  sitting 
up  in  bed.  I  have  occasionally  had  cause  to  regret  attempting  to 
resume  solid  food  even  when  the  condition  appeared  to  indicate  that 
all  danger  had  passed ;  and,  moreover,  I  have  witnessed  several  cases 
of  severe  relapse  which  have  apparently  been  the  direct  result  of  in- 
judicious use  of  solids,  given  by  the  friends  without  the  permission 
of  the  doctor  in  attendance.  I  am  convinced  that  it  is  better  to 
defer  the  administration  of  solids  too  long  than  to  employ  them  at 
all  too  soon.  In  the  one  case  the  convalescence  may  perhaps  be  a 
little  retarded,  in  the  other  severe  risks  may  be  incurred. 

During  the  early  days  of  convalescence  it  is  unnecessary  to  employ 
tonic  remedies,  such  as  quinine  and  iron,  since  these  will  serve  to 
promote  appetite,  and  will,  therefore,  increase  the  difficulty  of  with- 
holding solid  food ;  but  after  solids  have  been  taken  for  some  few 
days  with  no  ill  effect  upon  the  temperature,  some  mild  tonic  pre- 
scription of  quinine  and  iron  may  be  given,  and  will  favor  the  return 
of  strength  and  vigor.  Convalescence  after  typhoid  fever  is  also 
hastened  by  change  of  air,  the  improvement  noted  during  the  first 
few  days  of  change  being  frequently  very  striking. 


TYPHUS  FEVER.  4-57 

Typhus  Fever  {Typhus  Exanthematicus).  The  onset  of  typhus 
fever  is  commonly  so  sudden  and  so  severe  that  the  patient  is  of 
necessity  obliged  to  keep  in  bed  from  the  commencement.  The 
general  management  of  this  highly  infectious  fever  does  not  mate- 
rially differ  from  that  already  indicated  in  detail  for  other  infectious 
fevers  (see  p.  419) ;  but  as  the  nature  of  the  contagion  is  somewhat 
obscure,  and  is  not  wholly  to  be  controlled  by  the  use  of  antiseptics 
or  disinfectants,  greater  precautions  should,  perhaps,  be  taken  for 
insuring  thorough  ventilation  of  the  room,  and  it  is  generally  desir- 
able to  place  the  bed  between  the  window  and  the  fireplace,  so  that 
there  shall  be  a  free  current  of  air  passing  over  the  patient. 

In  the  selection  of  the  room,  it  is  especially  important  for  this 
fever  to  effect  perfect  isolation  by  placing  the  patient  at  the  top  of 
the  house. 

The  treatment  does  not  differ  from  that  already  recommended  for 
uncomplicated  cases  of  typhoid  fever ;  in  other  words,  it  is  largely 
influenced  by  the  endeavor  to  keep  the  febrile  symptoms  within 
reasonable  limits  and  to  maintain  the  strength  during  the  short 
course  of  the  fever.  For  these  objects  it  may  be  necessary  to  use 
antipyretic  measures,  such  as  cold  sponging  or  the  cold  bath ;  the 
wet  pack  may  also  be  used  if  there  is  much  delirium.  Since  the 
pulse  often  shows  signs  of  extreme  weakness,  stimulants  are  needed 
from  time  to  time. 

In  addition  to  the  administration  of  brandy  or  of  ether,  camphor 
or  ammonia  may  be  used  to  increase  the  force  of  the  pulse,  and  with 
the  same  object  strychnine  may  be  given  hypodermatically,  or  it  may 
be  administered  by  the  mouth  in  conjunction  with  the  tincture  or 
infusion  of  digitalis. 

Typhus  fever  is  now  rarely  seen,  owing  to  the  great  improvements 
in  the  sanitary  conditions  of  the  dwellings  of  the  poorer  classes,  but 
since  it  appears  to  develop  most  frequently  with  conditions  of  over- 
crowding and  defective  nutrition,  it  is  almost  essential  that  the 
patient  should  be  removed  to  a  hospital  or  nursing  home,  to  diminish 
the  risk  of  the  spread  of  the  disease  and  to  insure  greater  cleanliness 
and  comfort. 

It  is  impossible  to  influence  the  duration  of  the  febrile  condition, 
the  temperature  falling  by  crisis  at  the  end  of  fourteen  days,  and  this 
fall  is  always  to  be  anticipated  unless  there  have  been  signs  of  undue 
weakness  of  the  pulse  or  of  excessively  high  temperature.  These 
symptoms  form  the  chief  indications  of  danger  in  every  case  of 


458  SPECIFIC  INFECTIO  US  DISEASES. 

typhus  fever,  but,  in  addition,  various  complications  are  sometimes 
associated  with  this  disease  and  will  call  for  appropriate  treatment. 
Pneumonia  must  be  considered  as  the  chief  of  these  complications, 
and  the  onset  is  frequently  apt  to  be  overlooked  unless  the  lung  is 
examined  daily. 

Of  the  other  complications  affecting  the  respiratory  organs  laryn- 
gitis and  pleurisy  deserve  mention.  Although  perhaps  most  common 
during  the  febrile  stage,  these  respiratory  troubles  may  arise  after 
the  crisis. 

A  form  of  albuminuria  is  fairly  common  during  the  height  of  the 
fever,  but  the  association  with  definite  structural  changes  is  not  very 
frequent.  When  this  condition  occurs  it  rarely  calls  for  treatment, 
though  it  may  be  necessary  to  adopt  antipyretic  measures  for  the 
relief  of  high  temperature,  and  thus  indirectly  to  benefit  the  renal 
engorgement. 

During  the  early  stage  of  the  disease  headache  may  be  very  severe 
and  may  call  for  the  use  of  cooling  applications.  To  some  extent 
the  headache  appears  to  be  linked  with  sleeplessness,  and  unless 
there  are  marked  indications  of  renal  changes,  small  doses  of  opium 
may  be  administered.  When  there  is  very  much  headache,  how- 
ever, it  is  advisable  to  examine  the  condition  of  the  bladder  from 
time  to  time  and  to  pass  a  catheter  periodically. 

When  there  is  much  coma  or  delirium,  it  will  also  be  advisable  to 
prevent  undue  dryness  of  the  mouth  and  lips  by  moistening  these 
frequently  with  water  or  with  diluted  glycerin.  The  parched  crack- 
ing of  the  lips  also  may  be  controlled  to  some  extent  by  spraying  the 
mouth  with  liquid  paraffin. 

Daring  the  febrile  condition  food  must  be  given  in  the  liquid  form 
at  frequent  intervals,  as  indicated  in  the  treatment  of  typhoid  fever, 
but  there  are  not  the  same  reasons  for  rigidly  avoiding  the  use  of 
all  solids  during  the  early  stage  of  convalescence.  With  the  fall  of 
temperature  convalescence  is  ordinarily  fairly  established,  unless 
some  complication  arises.  Hence  after  one  or  two  days  of  normal 
temperature  it  will  be  advisable  to  commence  the  administration  of 
tonics  and  the  use  of  a  more  liberal  dietary. 

Relapsing  Fever  [Febris  vs.  Typhus  Recwrens).  Relapsing  fever, 
which  is  an  infectious  disease  marked  by  an  acute  febrile  attack  last- 
ing about  a  week,  and  followed,  after  an  interval  of  six  or  seven 
days,  by  a  second  similar  but  perhaps  milder  attack,  is,  like  typhus 
fever,  to  be  treated  by  isolation  and  by  symptomatic  treatment.    We 


RELAPSING  FEVER.  459 

are  not  so  far  acquainted  with  any  specific  form  of  treatment  for 
this  disease,  and  the  utmost  that  can  be  done  is  to  maintain  nourish- 
ment, to  relieve  constipation,  or  perhaps  to  promote  intestinal  action 
by  the  use  of  gentle  aperients. 

In  this  disease  stimulants  may  be  administered  somewhat  freely, 
especially  when  there  are  any  indications  of  failure  of  the  heart's 
action.  To  combat  the  weakness  which  always  attends  this  fever, 
iron  sulphate  and  quinine  may  be  given  internally,  while  if  the  fever 
is  very  high  a  diaphoretic  mixture  may  be  prescribed — for  example, 
solution  of  ammonium  acetate,  together  with  potassium  acetate,  and 
perhaps  with  tincture  of  digitalis,  the  last  being  of  considerable  ser- 
vice in  promoting  the  strength  of  the  pulse  and  in  favoring  diuresis. 

When  pains  in  the  muscles  and  joints  are  prominent  symptoms, 
they  may  be  dealt  with  by  the  internal  administration  of  quinine 
and  opium,  and  by  the  local  application  of  preparations  containing 
opium.  These  pains  are  most  frequent  during  the  stage  of  remission 
and  after  a  relapse,  but  they  are  also  often  present  during  the  febrile 
attacks. 

When  the  spleen  remains  large  during  the  stage  of  convalescence, 
quinine  is  generally  of  considerable  service,  especially  Avhen,  in  addi- 
tion, mild  attacks  of  fever  of  a  remittent  type  occur  from  time  to 
time.  During  the  attack  headache  and  delirium  are  best  dealt  with 
by  cold  applications.  Opium  is  usually  recommended  in  this  con- 
dition, but,  since  suppression  of  urine  and  ursemic  symptoms  are  not 
uncommon,  opium  must  be  employed  with  considerable  discretion. 

During  the  height  of  "the  fever  there  may  be  frequent  complaint 
of  pain  over  the  hepatic  and  lumbar  regions.  This  may,  to  some 
extent,  be  relieved  by  the  use  of  warm  fomentations. 

Diarrhoea  is  a  common  sequel  or  complication  of  relapsing  fever, 
and  it  often  occurs  when  the  feeding  during  the  stage  of  convales- 
cence is  somewhat  deficient. 

The  tendency  to  ophthalmia  is  best  averted  by  the  early  use  of 
nourishing  food.  Should  ophthalmia  develop,  however,  atropine 
should  be  dropped  into  the  eyes,  and  repeated  small  doses  of  calomel 
and  opium  should  be  given.  For  the  relief  of  pain  leeches  may  be 
applied  to  the  temples. 

Dysenteric  and  pulmonary  complications  are  also  of  fairly  fre- 
quent occurrence,  and  the  former  calls  for  the  use  of  vegetable 
astringents,  or  of  ipecacuanha  and  opium,  while  both  conditions 
indicate  the  free  employment  of  quinine  and  of  stimulants. 


460  SPECIFIC  INFECTIOUS  DISEASES. 

Epidemic  Influenza  {La  Grippe).  This  troublesome  epidemic  is 
in  general  marked  by  sufficiently  definite  symptoms,  though  the  type 
varies  in  different  epidemics.  The  commonest  symptoms  are  those 
of  a  mild  pyrexia,  with  headache,  with  pain  in  the  back  rather  like 
lumbago,  and  pains  iu  the  limbs,  which  may  resemble  those  of  a 
mild  rheumatic  attack.  These  symptoms  are  often  so  mild  that 
during  the  earlier  epidemics  they  were  not  considered  of  sufficient 
importance  to  necessitate  any  alteration  of  the  daily  routine.  The 
danger  of  the  complications  and  sequelae  of  influenza  has  now  per- 
haps led  to  an  exaggerated  dread  of  this  disease,  though  clearly 
there  is  greater  wisdom  in  warding  off  dangers  than  in  incurring 
unnecessary  risks.  The  main  complications  differ  in  a  remarkable 
way. 

With  some  epidemics  pulmonary  troubles  arise,  others  assume 
a  gastro-intestinal  form,  others  again  are  marked  by  severe  cerebral 
symptoms.  Occasionally  two  or  more  of  these  different  types  of 
complications  may  coexist.  The  tardy  convalescence  is  extremely 
typical,  and  may  sometimes  lead  to  a  diagnosis  when  the  actual 
attack  has  been  almost  disregarded.  During  convalescence  there  is 
usually  great  mental  depression,  and  often  irregularity  of  the  heart, 
with  palpitation  on  slight  exertion.  The  liability  to  pulmonary 
troubles  is  greatly  increased  during  convalescence,  and  severe  bron- 
chitis, pneumonia,  and  even  the  rapid  development  of  phthisis  are 
frequently  attributed  to  lack  of  care  during  the  initial  attack  or  to 
undue  exposure  before  health  has  been  restored. 

The  treatment  of  influenza  must  depend  upon  the  prevalent  type 
and  upon  the  symptoms  presented  during  the  early  course.  There 
can  be  no  doubt  that  even  though  the  attack  may  be  mild,  it  is  de- 
sirable to  keep  the  patient  in  bed  from  the  onset,  and  in  the  house 
for  some  days  after  convalescence  is  well  advanced.  The  febrile 
condition,  the  loss  of  appetite  and  of  the  sense  of  taste  indicate  the 
need  of  a  liquid  diet,  which  should  largely  consist  of  milk,  though 
beef-tea,  chicken  broth,  or  jelly  should  be  given  occasionally.  Dur- 
ing convalescence  a  much  more  liberal  diet  should  be  adopted,  strong, 
nutritious  soups,  such  as  ox-tail  or  turtle,  may  be  given,  and  as  diges- 
tive powers  return  the  appetite  should  be  tempted  with  fish,  poultry, 
game,  and  meat.  Alcohol  is  not  often  required  during  the  attack, 
and  its  indiscriminate  use  is  to  be  deprecated,  as  it  appears  to 
increase  headache  and  the  exhausting  night-sweats  which  often 
occur. 


EPIDEMIC  INFLUENZA.  461 

During  convalescence,  however,  alcoliol  is  frequently  of  consider- 
able service  when  the  pulse  is  weak  and  irregular,  and  when  attacks 
of  palpitation  and  shortness  of  breath  follow  slight  exercise.  It  is 
also  indicated  when  pulmonary  complications  or  sequelee  arise,  more 
particularly  pneumonia,  Avhich  may  assume  an  adynamic  type  and 
threaten  life  from  cardiac  failure. 

The  medicinal  treatment  must  be  based  upon  the  chief  symptoms. 
A  purgative  is  generally  needed,  except  in  the  gastro-intestinal 
form,  where  vomiting  and  purging  may  call  for  appropriate  reme- 
dies. The  pyrexia  is  now  rarely  sufficiently  severe  to  call  for  the 
adoption  of  antipyretic  measures,  but  in  some  of  the  earlier  epi- 
demics the  temperature  occasionally  rose  to  105°  or  106°  and  neces- 
sitated the  use  of  wet  packs  or  of  tepid  sponging.  Possibly  the 
greater  care  now  taken  during  the  initial  stages  reduces  the  liability 
to  these  high  temperatures.  Sodium  salicylate  is  frequently  given 
to  relieve  milder  febrile  attacks,  and  it  is  of  some  service  in  reducing 
the  severity  of  the  pains  in  the  loins  and  the  limbs.  Quinine  is 
often  employed  with  the  same  object,  but  should  only  be  used  in 
moderate  doses,  since  large  doses  are  likely  to  increase  headache. 
This  tendency  may,  however,  be  diminished  by  giving  half-drachm 
doses  of  diluted  hydrobromic  acid  with  each  dose  of  quinine.  With 
mild  cases,  however,  it  is  perhaps  better  to  reserve  quinine  for  the 
stage  of  convalescence,  and  only  to  employ  simple  diaphoretic  and 
diuretic  mixtures  containing  liquor  ammonii  acetatis  and  spiritus 
setheris  nitrosi.  Troublesome,  irritating  cough,  with  very  scanty 
expectoration,  often  necessitates  the  use  of  sedative  expectorants. 
The  official  lozenge  of  ipecacuanha,  or  that  of  ipecacuanha  and 
morphine,  will  often  serve  to  allay  irritation.  When,  however,  bron- 
chitic  or  pulmonary  troubles  arise,  stimulating  expectorants  must  be 
used,  and,  as  already  mentioned,  the  condition  of  the  pulse  may 
indicate  the  importance  of  employing  stimulants. 

Gastro-intestinal  troubles  are  to  be  dealt  with  on  general  prin- 
ciples ;  occasionally  benefit  follows  the  employment  of  a  brisk  purga- 
tive, more  often  sedative  and  astringent  remedies  must  be  used. 

For  the  persistent  headache,  phenazone  in  5-grain  doses  will  often 
be  of  service,  but  this  remedy  must  not  be  given  indiscriminately, 
on  account  of  its  powerfully  depressant  influence  upon  the  pulse. 
Sleeplessness  may  call  for  the  use  of  morphine,  sulphonal,  or  paral- 
dehyde, but  the  best  cure  for  this  symptom  lies  in  change  of  air  so 
soon  as  convalescence  is  established. 


462  SPEGIFIG  INFECTIOUS  DISEASES. 

Influenza  in  childhood  has  been  studied  by  Furst.^  He  describes 
a  period  of  depression,  with  some  nasal  catarrh  and  slight,  dry  cough, 
preceding  the  onset  of  the  fever.  This  period,  which  he  speaks  of 
as  the  period  of  incubation,  may  last,  he  says,  eight  or  ten  days, 
although  it  may  be  observed  that  the  incubation,  in  the  adult  at 
least,  is  generally  much  shorter.  The  onset  of  the  pyrexia  is  marked 
by  shivering,  the  voice  becomes  hoarse,  deglutition  is  sometimes 
painful,  the  nasal  catarrh  increases,  and  there  is  some  dyspnoea  ;  con- 
stipation is  the  rule,  and  in  many  cases  there  is  severe  headache, 
though  in  infants  the  latter  symptom  may  be  replaced  by  convul- 
sions. He  believes  that  treatment  may  have  a  very  material  influ- 
ence in  cutting  short  the  disease,  and  of  all  internal  drugs  he  prefers 
salipyrin,  which  he  looks  upon  as  almost  a  specific.  At  ages  of  from 
five  to  ten  years  he  gives  4|^  grains  thrice  a  day ;  from  ten  to  four- 
teen years  15  grains  thrice  a  day.  After  a  couple  of  days  it  will 
usually  be  suflicient  to  give  two  doses  a  day  only.  Monsengeil, 
some  years  ago,  said  that  he  found  salipyrin  most  useful  in  influ- 
enza, especially  in  influenza  with  little  or  no  elevation  of  tempera- 
ture, as  it  did  not  produce  the  depression  which  antipyrine  is  apt  to 
cause.  Furst  treats  the  pharyngitis  and  rhinitis,  which  are  often 
the  most  troublesome  symptoms  of  influenza  in  childhood,  by  pul- 
verizations ;  for  this  purpose  he  prefers  a  2  per  cent,  alcoholic  solu- 
tion of  rectified  turpentine,  although  he  employs  also  a  mixture  of 
menthol,  eucalyptus,  and  cocaine  in  a  suitable  menstruum. 

Reference  has  already  been  made  to  the  risks  of  the  development 
of  pulmonary  sequelse  during  convalescence  ;  it  is,  therefore,  only 
necessary  to  add  that  great  care  should  be  taken  to  avoid  any  sudden 
alteration  of  temperature  and  any  exposure  to  wind  or  draughts, 
and  to  insist  upon  the  need  of  warm  clothing  and  the  use  of  addi- 
tional wraps  on  changes  from  town  to  country. 

1  Eev.  Mens,  des  Mai.  de  I'Enf.,  January,  1898  ;  Year-Book  of  Treatment,  1899,, 
p.  171. 


CHAPTER    XX. 

SPECIFIC   INFECTIOUS   DISEASES— CotUinued. 

Diphtheria — Erysipelas — Hydrophobia  (Rabies) — Lockjaw  ( Tetanus) — Malarial 
Fevers  {Intermittent,  Remittent,  Pernicious) — Cholera  Asiatica. 

Diphtheria.  The  treatment  of  diphtheria  must  necessarily  de- 
pend greatly  upon  the  site  affected,  upon  the  severity  of  the  symp- 
toms, and  upon  the  degree  of  prostration.  Of  late  years  the  treat- 
ment has  become  much  more  hopeful  since  the  introduction  of 
antitoxin,  which  has  resulted  indirectly  from  the  discovery  of  the 
part  played  in  this  disease  by  the  Klebs-Loeffler  bacillus.  Previous 
to  the  use  of  antitoxin,  a  very  large  number  of  specifics  for  diph- 
theria had  been  recommended  at  various  times,  but  these  specifics 
gave  rise  to  much  disappointment,  and  many  observers  maintained 
that  no  remedies  were  of  much  value. 

The  general  lines  of  treatment  to  be  adopted  for  this  disease  may 
be  conveniently  grouped  under  the  following  headings  :  (1)  Hygienic 
treatment ;  (2)  constitutional  treatment ;  (3)  local  treatment ;  (4) 
symptomatic  treatment ;  and  in  addition  must  be  mentioned  the  use 
of  antitoxin,  to  which  the  recent  reduction  in  the  mortality  of  this 
disease  is  undoubtedly  to  be  attributed.  The  following  account  of 
the  hygienic  and  constitutional  treatment  will  hold  good  for  all  forms 
of  diphtheria,  while  the  special  treatment  demanded  by  the  site 
attacked  will  receive  consideration  with  the  local  and  symptomatic 
treatment. 

The  first  essential  connected  with  hygienic  treatment  is  isolation, 
and  the  selection  of  a  room  for  the  patient  should,  if  possible,  be 
guided  by  the  desire  to  secure  light,  free  ventilation,  and  an  even 
temperature.  The  depressing  nature  of  the  disease  and  the  possible 
need  of  surgical  interference  render  light  a  necessity,  while  the  risks 
of  the  spread  of  the  disease  are  largely  influenced  by  the  freedom  of 
ventilation.  The  temperature  of  the  room  should  be  maintained  at 
from  65°  to  70°  F.,  but  the  advantages  of  this  temperature  should 
not  be  purchased  at  the  expense  of  ventilation,  which  is  more  im- 
portant than  the  actual  degree  of  warmth.     In  laryngeal  cases,  and 


464  SPECIFIC  INFECTIOUS  DISEASES. 

especially  when  tracheotomy  has  been  performed,  it  will  be  well  to 
nse  a  steam  kettle  and  sometimes  also  to  surround  the  bed  with  a 
tent,  but  the  kettle  should  be  placed  near  the  foot  of  the  bed,  and 
for  the  convenience  of  nursing  the  tent  should  be  freely  open  on 
one  side. 

It  is  desirable,  especially  with  children,  to  adopt  measures  to 
restrain  movements,  since  there  is  some  danger  of  cardiac  failure  if, 
during  the  course  of  the  disease,  the  patient  suddenly  sits  up  in  bed. 
Further,  on  account  of  the  risks  of  the  spread  of  the  disease,  as  well 
as  on  account  of  the  sudden  changes  which  may  supervene,  it  is  de- 
sirable, whenever  possible,  to  employ  trained  nurses  both  night  and 
day  ;  the  sudden  changes  which  may  arise  demand  watchful  care  and 
accurate  observation. 

The  constitutional  treatment  must  be  influenced  by  the  depressing 
nature  of  the  disease,  which  calls  for  the  administration  of  nourish- 
ing food  in  a  liquid  form,  and  also  for  the  employment  of  alcohol. 
According  to  the  age  of  the  patient,  food  and  medicine  may  be  given 
either  with  a  feeding  cup  or  with  a  spoon,  so  as  to  avoid  risks  of 
disturbance  of  the  circulation  from  sudden  changes  of  position.  No 
rule  can  be  laid  down  as  to  the  amount  of  stimulant  to  be  employed, 
since  this  must  be  determined  by  the  degree  of  prostration,  as  indi- 
cated by  the  pulse  or  by  the  aspect.  In  severe  cases,  when  the  pulse 
shows  signs  of  failure,  digitalis,  strophanthus,  or  strychnine  may  be 
required,  the  two  former  being  administered  by  the  mouth,  the  last, 
which  is  ordinarily  reserved  for  emergencies,  being  given  hypoder- 
raatically.  Tincture  of  ferric  chloride,  with  diluted  phosphoric  acid 
and  glycerin,  is  occasionally  of  service  in  mild  cases,  but  it  must  be 
given  in  comparatively  small  doses,  on  account  of  the  readiness  with 
which  it  disturbs  digestion. 

With  regard  to  the  local  treatment  of  diphtheria,  potassium  chlo- 
rate has  been  often  used  as  a  mouth  wash,  but  this  is  inconvenient 
with  young  children,  and  in  infants  it  may  induce  toxic  renal  symp- 
toms, if  given  internally  without  due  caution.  In  laryngeal  cases 
relief  is  sometimes  afforded  by  sucking  small  lumps  of  ice,  since 
the  numbing  influence  of  the  cold  may  favor  the  introduction  of 
food. 

Apart  from  local  sedative  measures  the  primary  idea  has  hitherto 
been  the  destruction  of  the  germs  causing  the  disease,  this  destruc- 
tion being  effected  either  by  escharotics  or  by  antiseptics,  while  some 
substances  have  had  transient  favor  as  solvents  of  the  membranes. 


DIPHTHERIA.  465 

To  a  very  great  extent  the  local  treatment  of  diphtheria  has  been 
rendered  unnecessary  since  the  introduction  of  antitoxin,  but  inas- 
much as  antitoxin  is  not  always  available  when  most  required,  it 
will  be  desirable  to  discuss  various  measures  which  may  be  used 
pending  its  arrival. 

The  treatment  with  escharotics — as,  for  example,  the  application 
of  silver  nitrate  or  of  various  strong  acids — has  long  been  discon- 
tinued, since  it  has  been  found  that  the  separation  of  the  membrane 
and  the  subsequent  caustic  action  involve  so  much  damage  that  the 
membrane  rapidly  re-forms.  Still,  whatever  form  of  local  treatment 
be  adopted,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  is  most  efficacious  when 
the  membrane  has  been  previously  gently  detached,  so  that  the  anti- 
septic agent  may  be  brought  as  far  as  possible  into  intimate  contact 
with  the  affected  surface.  The  detachment  may  sometimes  be  effected 
by  gentle  streams  of  water,  but  in  general  the  false  membrane  is 
more  satisfactorily  removed  by  the  use  of  small  swabs  of  cotton- 
wool or  of  soft  lint  mounted  upon  vulcanite  rods. 

Similar  swabs  may  also  be  employed  to  apply  the  antiseptic  agent 
after  the  removal  of  the  membrane.  The  local  application  which  is 
commonly  used  is  the  official  lactic  acid,  which  represents  75  per 
cent,  of  anhydrous  hydrogen  lactate.  When  it  is  difficult  to  reach 
the  affected  area  with  the  swab,  this  solution  may  be  used  as  a  spray, 
but  for  this  purpose  it  is  generally  advisable  to  dilute  the  lactic  acid 
with  three  times  its  bulk  of  water.  Some  prefer  the  employment 
of  corrosive  mercuric  chloride,  or  a  mixture  consisting  of  1  part  of 
corrosive  sublimate  and  5  parts  of  tartaric  acid  in  1000  parts  of 
water.  This  solution  is  employed,  like  the  last,  after  the  removal 
of  the  diphtheritic  patch. 

Others  prefer  a  saturated  solution  of  borax  with  soda,  or  of  boric 
acid  in  glycerin,  while  for  its  antiseptic  action  quinine  is  sometimes 
used  of  the  strength  of  10  grains  to  the  ounce,  dissolved  in  a  little 
hydrochloric  acid  and  mixed  with  equal  parts  of  glycerin  and  water. 
Potassium  permanganate  is  also  occasionally  employed  in  the  strength 
of  20  grains  to  the  ounce,  while  the  biniodide  of  mercury  solution 
has  been  much  praised.     This  consists  of  the  following  : 


R. — Hydrargyri  chloridi  corrosivi 
Potassii  iodidi 
Ferri  et  ammonii  citratis 

Syrupi    

Aquse     ..... 
30 


■      gr.  X. 
gr.  XX. 

ad      gij. 


466  SPECIFIC  INFECTIOUS  DISEASES. 

Prior  to  the  introduction  of  antitoxin  I  obtained  some  satisfaction 
from  the  use  of  sulphur  insufflation,  but  the  treatment  with  paraffin, 
in  which  the  ordinary  paraffin  used  in  lamps  is  applied  with  a  camel's- 
hair  brush  to  the  raw  surface  every  hour,  did  not  in  my  hands  give 
very  good  results.  Of  other  local  remedies  it  may  be  sufficient  to 
mention  a  mixture  of  sulphurous  acid  and  glycerin,  liquor  sodse 
chlorinatse  and  chlorine  water,  while  peroxide  of  hydrogen  has 
found  some  adherents,  the  chief  objection  to  its  use  being  the 
unstable  character  of  the  solution.  The  principal  solvents  that 
have  been  recommended,  apart  from  antiseptics,  are  alkaline  solu- 
tions, pepsin,  papain,  and  resorcin.  These  solvents,  however,  are 
very  slow  in  their  action,  if,  indeed,  they  possess  any  solvent  power. 
In  employing  any  of  the  above  for  the  purpose  of  irrigation,  it 
is  advisable  that  the  solution  should  be  moderately  warm,  since  to 
some  extent  the  heat  favors  not  only  the  action  of  the  drug,  but 
also  the  detachment  of  the  membrane.  Although  solutions  may  be 
used  for  irrigation  in  cases  of  pharyngeal  diphtheria,  they  occasion- 
ally cause  much  discomfort  if  employed  in  nasal  and  post-nasal 
diphtheria,  although,  without  a  doubt,  the  affected  surface  is  more 
readily  reached  by  irrigation  than  by  any  other  plan  of  treatment. 
In  nasal  and  post-nasal  diphtheria  the  solutions  are  sometimes  em- 
ployed in  the  form  of  spray  ;  but  however  soothing  this  may  be,  the 
spray  does  not  exert  the  same  cleansing  effect,  and  whenever  pos- 
sible it  is  better  to  use  gentle  irrigation  or  to  syringe  the  nasal 
chambers  gently  with  diluted  solutions  of  potassium  chlorate  and 
glycerin,  or  of  borax  and  glycerin. 

Since  it  is  so  difficult  to  apply  local  treatment  in  nasal  and  post- 
nasal diphtheria,  this  form  is  the  most  dangerous,  because  the  toxins 
are  both  produced  and  absorbed  more  rapidly,  and  the  constitutional 
symptoms  become  more  urgent  and  produce  severe  asthenia,  which 
demands  the  frequent  and  liberal  employment  of  stimulants. 

In  connection  with  any  form  of  diphtheria  the  cervical  and  sub- 
maxillary glands  may  become  much  inflamed.  When  there  is  evi- 
dence of  the  formation  of  pus,  this  should  be  evacuated  early,  and 
warm  local  applications  Avill  be  essential ;  but  if  the  glands  are 
merely  painful  and  hard,  relief  may  sometimes  be  afforded  by  the 
continuous  use  of  ice  bags  or  Leiter's  tubes.  In  the  treatment  of 
aural  diphtheria,  should  mastoid  tenderness  develop,  it  may  be 
necessary  to  make  an  incision  over  the  mastoid  process  down  to  the 
periosteum. 


DIPHTHERIA.  467 

Though  it  is  still  necessary  to  study  the  above  forms  of  treat- 
ment, it  has  now  been  shown  that  antitoxin  gives  the  greatest 
reduction  of  mortality ;  and,  further,  it  has  been  found  that  the 
benefits  are  largely  dependent  upon  the  date  at  which  this  remedy 
is  used.  It  cannot  be  too  strongly  urged  that  the  good  results  to 
be  derived  from  antitoxin  depend  largely  upon  its  early  employ- 
ment ;  and  yet  it  may,  nevertheless,  be  of  value  even  when  the 
patients  appear  to  be  moribund  when  first  seen.  The  advantages 
from  this  treatment  are,  primarily,  the  early  separation  of  the  exu- 
dation and  the  improvement  in  the  general  condition  and  aspect  of 
the  patient.  After  the  nse  of  antitoxin  it  is  comparatively  rare 
for  the  membrane  to  extend,  and  in  cases  of  nasal  diphtheria  there 
is  frequently  considerable  diminution  in  the  amount  of  offensive  and 
irritating  discharge  from  the  nose. 

Although  the  introduction  of  antitoxin  does  not  obviate  the  neces- 
sity for  operative  measures,  yet,  if  it  has  been  found  advisable  to 
perform  tracheotomy  or  intubation,  the  tube  may  usually  be  removed 
at  a  much  earlier  date  than  was  formerly  possible,  probably  indeed 
within  twenty-four  or  forty-eight  hours  from  the  time  of  operation. 

Perhaps  some  few  words  may  be  desirable  with  regard  to  the 
mode  of  administering  antitoxin.  When  first  introduced  the  dose 
was  from  10  c.c.  to  20  c.c,  and  this  dose  had  perhaps  to  be  repeated 
within  twelve  or  twenty-four  hours.  At  the  present  time,  however, 
it  is  not  customary  to  measure  the  amount,  since  it  has  been  found 
possible  to  concentrate  the  antitoxin  and  to  affix  measures  of  its 
power  of  producing  immunity.  It  is  now  customary  to  give  a  dose 
of  1000  immunization  units  every  twelve  hours  for  the  first  twenty- 
four,  thirty-six,  or  forty-eight  hours,  according  to  the  gravity  of  the 
case.  Much  larger  doses,  however,  have  frequently  been  employed. 
In  America,  for  example,  it  is  customary  in  severe  cases  to  use  from 
1500  to  2000  units  for  the  first  injection,  and  some  observers  recom- 
mend that  as  much  as  4000  units  should  form  the  appropriate  dose 
for  a  child  of  four  to  six  years  of  age. 

These  injections  may  be  made  in  any  part  where  the  subcutaneous 
tissue  is  loose,  as,  for  example,  in  the  flank  or  over  the  thigh.  The 
syringe  employed^is  one  which  may  be  readily  taken  to  pieces,  so 
as  to  be  disinfected  by  boiling.  The  apparatus  should  be  sterilized 
previous  to  employment,  and  the  skin  over  the  site  of  the  intended 
injection  should  be  first  washed  thoroughly  with  soap  and  water, 
and  afterward  with  a  solution  of  carbolic  acid.     Injection  should 


468  SPEC  IF  10  INFECTIOUS  DISEASES. 

be  effected  slowly,  since  otherwise  considerable  pain  may  follow  the 
introduction  of  this  comparatively  large  bulk  of  liquid.  After  the 
removal  of  the  needle,  firm  pressure  should  be  made  over  the  site  of 
injection,  to  prevent  any  loss  of  seram.  It  is  frequently  customary 
to  apply  a  small  pad  of  sublimate  wool  over  the  site  of  the  punc- 
ture and  to  fix  this  in  position  with  collodion.  The  need  for  repe- 
tition is  to  be  measured  by  the  general  course  of  symptoms.  When 
the  temperature  falls  and  the  membrane  becomes  detached,  and  does 
not  reappear,  there  is,  as  a  rule,  no  need  for  the  repetition  of  antitoxin. 

This  mode  of  treatment  has  been  credited  with  causing  many 
complications,  as,  for  example,  the  development  of  a  rash  and  inter- 
ference with  the  renal  functions.  The  rash  of  antitoxin  does  not 
possess  any  clinical  importance.  Frequently  it  resembles  urticaria, 
but  sometimes  it  may  simulate  the  eruption  of  measles  or  of  scarlet 
fever,  and  since  it  may  be  associated  with  a  slight  rise  of  tempera- 
ture, it  is  necessary  to  be  on  one's  guard  against  mistaking  the  anti- 
toxin rash  for  one  of  the  specific  fevers. 

With  regard  to  albuminuria  after  the  use  of  antitoxin,  this  symp- 
tom is  certainly  somewhat  more  frequent,  but  it  also  does  not  possess 
any  clinical  importance,  since  usually  the  albuminuria  speedily  sub- 
sides and  does  not  lead  to  any  permanent  renal  affection.  In  some- 
what rare  cases  the  use  of  antitoxin  appears  to  be  followed  by  the 
production  of  pains  in  the  joints  comparable  to  those  of  acute  rheu- 
matism. This  symptom,  however,  like  other  complications,  does 
not  give  rise  to  any  permanent  anxiety. 

Laryngeal  diphtheria  calls  for  special  watchfulness,  since  even 
after  the  use  of  antitoxin,  symptoms  of  laryngeal  obstruction  may 
develop.  It  is  well  always  to  have  instruments  at  hand  ready  for 
intubation  or  tracheotomy,  and,  in  addition,  it  is  advisable  to  use 
a  steam  kettle  somewhat  more  freely  than  in  other  forms  of  diph- 
theria. The  vapor  may  with  advantage  be  medicated ;  thus  at  the 
Evelina  Hospital  we  are  in  the  habit  of  employing  a  mixture  of 
creosote  and  carbolic  acid ;  1  ounce  of  creosote  and  2  drachms  of 
powdered  acacia  are  rubbed  together  and  added  to  2  ounces  of  solu- 
tion of  carbolic  acid  (1  in  20),  the  mixture  being  then  put  into  a 
bronchitis  kettle  with  a  pint  of  water.  Although  the  vapor  thus 
formed,  or  the  vapor  of  turpentine,  of  oil  of  eucalyptus,  or  of  tere- 
bene,  is  frequently  used,  it  is  extremely  doubtful  whether  they  exert 
any  distinct  disinfectant  power,  since  it  is  impossible  to  use  the  solu- 
tion in  a  form  strong  enough  to  destroy  germ  growth. 


DIPHTHERIA.  469 

In  laiyngeal  diphtheria  emetics  have  been  sometimes  recom- 
mended, with  the  view  of  favoring  the  removal  of  the  membrane, 
the  emetic  most  commonly  employed  being  drachm  doses  of  ipecac- 
uanha wine,  given  repeatedly  at  short  intervals  until  vomiting  results. 

The  indications  for  operation  are  those  which  show  that  respira- 
tion is  being  markedly  interfered  with.  These  are  chiefly  the  fol- 
lowing :  suppression  of  voice,  depression  of  the  suprasternal  and 
supraclavicular  spaces,  sucking  in  of  the  lower  part  of  the  chest, 
restlessness,  and  sleeplessness. 

The  choice  of  operation  depends  partly  upon  the  instruments 
available  and  partly  upon  the  manual  dexterity  of  the  operator. 
Of  the  two  I  am  certainly  in  favor  of  intubation  whenever  prac- 
ticable, since  tracheotomy  is  often  followed  by  the  appearance  of 
sloughy  patches  on  the  Avound,  although  this  complication  is  less 
frequent  since  the  introduction  of  antitoxin. 

If  tracheotomy  is  to  be  done,  it  is  desirable  that  the  operation 
should  be  performed  before  there  is  much  lividity,  and  after  the 
operation  the  tube  should  be  entirely  removed  as  early  as  possible. 
If  the  removal  of  the  tube  is  deferred  much  difficulty  may  be  ex- 
perienced, especially  if  the  tube  has  been  allowed  to  remain  in  place 
for  over  three  or  four  days,  since  under  these  circumstances  the  child 
often  becomes  accustomed  to  the  presence  of  the  tube  and  is  nervous 
and  excitable  as  soon  as  it  is  removed.  In  some  cases,  however,  the 
difficulty  of  respiration  may  result  from  paralysis  of  the  muscles  of 
the  larynx,  so  that  the  glcTttis  becomes  closed  during  efforts  of 
inspiration. 

After  either  tracheotomy  or  intubation  it  will  be  necessary  to  feed 
with  liquids,  and  in  young  children  the  feeding  for  the  first  few  days 
is  most  conveniently  effected  by  means  of  the  nasal  tube.  This  can 
be  passed  comparatively  easily  into  the  pharynx,  but  after  its  intro- 
duction it  is  always  desirable  to  wait  for  a  few  seconds  to  see  that 
breathing  is  being  satisfactorily  performed  before  introducing  milk, 
beef -tea,  or  any  other  form  of  liquid  nourishment  through  the  funnel. 

The  complications  which  may  arise  in  connection  with  tracheotomy 
I  have  fully  dealt  with  elsewhere.^  It  may  suffice,  therefore,  to  say 
here  that  notwithstanding  the  possible  development  of  diphtheritic 
patches  upon  the  wound  after  tracheotomy,  I  am  distinctly  in  favor 
of  early  operation,  and,  whenever  it  is  possible,  of  the  simultaneous 

^  Diphtheria  and  Antitoxin,  p.  112  (Longmans). 


470  SPECIFIC  INFECTIO  US  DISEASES. 

employment  of  antitoxin,  since  instances  where  complications  have 
arisen  are,  in  my  own  experience,  those  in  which  antitoxin  has  not 
been  used  or  in  which  the  operation  has  been  deferred  too  late. 

Passing  next  to  the  special  symptoms,  complications,  and  sequelae 
of  diphtheria,  it  must  be  noted  that  some  of  the  complications  arise 
during  the  course  of  the  disease,  while  others  are  to  be  regarded  as 
sequelae  which  are  separated  from  the  original  attack,  and  may  make 
their  first  appearance  some  weeks  after  convalescence.  The  more 
important  complications  are  those  connected  with  the  digestive  sys- 
tem. In  very  severe  cases  uncontrollable  vomiting  and  diarrhoea 
may  occur,  especially  toward  the  fatal  termination.  Although  under 
such  circumstances  it  is  necessary  to  employ  measures  to  counteract 
these  symptoms,  the  greatest  care  must  be  taken  to  avoid  the  risk 
of  cardiac  collapse,  since  after  violent  attacks  of  vomiting  the  pulse 
frequently  becomes  weak,  rapid,  and  irregular.  In  such  circum- 
stances, therefore,  stimulants  must  be  used  somewhat  freely,  and  all 
violent  movements  must  be  controlled. 

Pulmonary  symptoms  may  also  develop  during  the  attack,  espe- 
cially when  the  case  is  one  of  laryngeal  diphtheria  and  the  mem- 
brane appears  to  extend  along  the  ramifications  of  the  bronchi. 
Notwithstanding  the  danger  of  pulmonary  symptoms,  these  cases 
appear  more  commonly  to  terminate  with  symptoms  of  cardiac 
failure.  Occasionally  the  lung  complication  takes  the  form  of 
engorgement,  but  sometimes  it  is  of  the  true  pneumonic  type,  and 
is  then  to  be  recognized  chiefly  by  the  alteration  in  the  percussion 
note  over  the  thorax,  since  the  laryngeal  stridor  masks  the  ordinary 
physical  signs  of  pneumonia.  Should  these  complications  develop, 
the  usual  treatment  for  pneumonia  must  be  followed,  preference 
being  given  to  the  stimulant  rather  than  the  depressant  expectorants. 

Epistaxis  is  another  complication  that  may  arise  more  commonly 
with  nasal  than  with  any  other  form  of  diphtheria,  but  this  rarely 
calls  for  special  treatment.  In  malignant  cases  hemorrhage  may 
also  occur  from  other  mucous  membranes,  as  from  the  alimentary 
canal,  from  the  bladder,  or  occasionally  from  the  lung.  But  the 
treatment  of  these  must  be  entirely  symptomatic. 

Of  the  multiplex  forms  of  paralysis  which  occur  subsequent  to 
diphtheria,  the  nasal  type  affects  the  soft  palate,  the  laryngeal 
muscles,  and  the  muscles  of  deglutition.  These  ordinarily  require 
no  special  treatment,  although  the  difficulty  of  deglutition  may 
necessitate  the  frequent  use  of  the  nasal  tube  ;  and,  moreover,  resto- 


ERYSIPELAS.  471 

ration  of  the  tone  of  the  muscles  may  to  some  extent  be  favored  by 
the  frequent  employment  of  small  doses  of  strychnine  or  the  tinc- 
ture of  nux  vomica.  Paralysis  of  the  diaphragm  is  comparatively 
frequent,  and  may  favor  the  occurrence  of  pulmonary  trouble,  the 
latter  symptom  adding  very  largely  to  the  danger,  owing  to  the 
difficulty  of  clearing  the  lung  of  any  inflammatory  exudation.  Par- 
alysis of  the  diaphragm  calls  for  complete  rest  in  the  recumbent 
posture  and  for  the  greatest  care  in  the  avoidance  of  chills.  The 
course  of  this  complication  is  ordinarily  somewhat  prolonged,  and 
although  some  improvement  may  follow  the  use  of  strychnine  or  of 
nux  vomica,  mild  electrical  currents  may  further  favor  the  restora- 
tion of  muscular  tone.  With  paralysis  of  the  intercostal  muscles, 
which  is  less  frequent,  I  have  been  able  to  hasten  recovery  by  the 
application  of  strong  galvanic  currents. 

Subsequent  to  diphtheria,  independently  of  cardiac  failure,  the  pulse 
frequently  shows  great  variation  in  rate  and  often  becomes  extremely 
irregular.  I  have  learned  to  dread  sudden  wide  variations  of  the 
pulse  rate,  since  I  have  on  more  than  one  occasion  found  that  this 
symptom  preceded  sudden  cardiac  failure.  Accordingly,  whenever 
these  marked  alterations  occur,  the  patient  should  be  kept  in  bed 
and  moderate  doses  of  tincture  of  digitalis  or  of  tincture  of  stro- 
phanthus  should  be  given. 

In  view  of  these  possible  dangers  during  convalescence,  it  is  de- 
sirable to  administer  tonics  as  early  as  possible  after  the  laryngeal 
and  pharyngeal  symptoms  have  subsided.  The  tincture  of  ferric 
chloride  and  quinine  should  be  employed  in  doses  appropriate  to 
the  age  of  the  patient,  and,  when  possible,  convalescence  should  be 
hastened  by  change  of  air,  preferably  to  the  seaside.  It  must  be 
admitted,  however,  that  even  in  the  duration  of  the  convalescence 
of  diphtheria  the  earlier  employment  of  antitoxin  appears  to  play 
an  important  part,  since  the  degree  of  depression  which  ordinarily 
follows  the  disease  is  diminished  by  the  curtailment  of  the  period 
of  special  severity. 

Erysipelas.  It  is  perhaps  doubtful  whether  this  condition,  which 
so  commonly  results  from  infection  following  upon  some  injury, 
should  be  considered  as  a  medical  or  a  surgical  condition ;  but  since 
cases  of  erysipelas  are  liable  to  occur  in  the  practice  of  every  medi- 
cal man,  and  since,  moreover,  in  hospital  practice  it  is  customary  to 
transfer  cases  of  erysipelas  from  the  surgical  to  the  medical  wards, 
there  is  some  reason  for  dealing:  with  this  disease  in  this  book. 


472  SPECIFIC  INFECTIOUS  DISEASES. 

Erysipelas  is  due  to  inflammatory  action  provoked  by  the  pres- 
ence of  the  streptococcus  erysipelatosus,  and  although  an  idiopathic 
form  of  erysipelas  is  frequently  described,  there  is  every  probability 
that  this  form  is  only  idiopathic  in  the  sense  of  the  site  of  injury 
or  of  the  introduction  of  the  streptococcus  being  not  immediately 
apparent. 

The  treatment  will  to  some  extent  be  determined  by  the  site 
affected  and  by  the  degree  of  the  inflammation.  There  is  in  general 
considerable  pyrexia  at  the  commencement  of  the  disease,  the  tem- 
perature rising  to  104°  or  105°  F.  This  pyrexia  may  call  for  treat- 
ment when  it  persists.  The  most  important  element,  however,  in 
the  treatment  lies  in  the  separation  of  the  patient  from  others  with 
open  wounds,  in  the  adoption  of  antiseptic  surgical  dressings  when 
the  disease  is  distinctly  of  traumatic  origin,  and  in  the  use  of  other 
local  measures  for  limiting  the  extension  of  the  disease.  It  will  also 
be  necessary  to  treat  complications  as  they  arise,  and  to  give  internal 
remedies  calculated  to  counteract  the  more  immediate  dangers. 

During  the  height  of  the  fever  the  diet  should  be  nourishing,  and 
should  be  administered  at  frequent  intervals  in  liquid  form.  The 
furred  condition  of  the  tongue,  the  height  of  the  temperature,  and 
the  headache  will  frequently  call  for  the  use  of  a  brisk  purgative, 
such  as  calomel,  which,  should  the  febrile  condition  persist,  it  may 
be  necessary  to  repeat  from  time  to  time.  The  administration  of 
stimulants  must  be  determined  by  the  condition  of  the  pulse.  It  is 
impossible  to  lay  down  any  general  rule  with  regard  to  the  amount 
that  should  be  given  in  the  twenty-four  hours,  but  the  huge  doses 
which  were  at  one  time  recommended  in  this  country  do  not  in  gen- 
eral appear  to  be  required,  and,  as  in  other  febrile  states,  the  quan- 
tity should  be  increased  or  diminished  as  the  pulse  shows  signs  of 
failure  or  as  it  regains  normal  strength. 

Numerous  local  applications  have  been  employed  to  diminish  the 
inflammatory  action,  to  relieve  pain,  or  to  check  the  advance  of  the 
disease.  The  affected  surface  is  sometimes  simply  dusted  with  a 
powder  consisting  of  equal  parts  of  starch  and  zinc  oxide.  More 
frequently,  however,  the  glycerite  of  lead  subacetate  is  applied  with 
a  soft  brush,  or  the  ointment  of  zinc  oxide  is  mixed  with  an 
equal  part  of  liquid  paraffin,  so  as  to  facilitate  its  application.  These 
measures  are  merely  palliatives,  and  they  do  not  limit  the  spread  of 
the  disease.  The  latter  object  is  sometimes  effected  by  painting  the 
skin  beyond  the  line  of  advance  with  silver  nitrate ;  the  extension 


HYDROPHOBIA.  473 

has  also  sometimes  been  arrested  by  painting  a  broad  band  of  collo- 
dion around  the  limb  above  the  line  of  redness,  and  occasionally 
more  direct  measures  are  used,  such  as  the  subcutaneous  injection  of 
a  2  per  cent,  solution  of  carbolic  acid  in  the  viciuity  of  the  affected 
area. 

A  2  per  cent,  solution  of  corrosive  mercuric  chloride  has  also  been 
used  subcutaneously,  but  the  greatest  advance  in  the  local  treatment 
is  afforded  by  the  employment  of  the  antistreptococcic  serum  or 
streptococcic  antitoxin.  The  dose  of  this  is  from  10  c.c.  to  20  c.c. 
every  six,  twelve,  or  twenty-four  hours,  but  much  larger  doses  have 
frequently  been  administered.  The  activity  of  this  antitoxin  depends 
to  some  extent  upon  its  age,  the  strength  rapidly  diminishing  if  the 
antitoxin  is  kept ;  this  fact  may,  in  some  measure,  explain  the  occa- 
sional failure  of  its  action.  Those  who  have  experimented  with 
fresh  specimens  speak  in  general  favorably  of  this  form  of  treatment. 

The  complications  which  may  arise  in  connection  with  erysipelas 
are  of  some  importance,  and  some  of  them  demand  surgical  meas- 
ures for  their  relief.  Thus  subcutaneous  abscesses  may  form,  and 
the  affected  skin  may  slough.  Occasionally,  also,  considerable  in- 
flammatory action  may  occur  in  the  region  of  the  larynx,  and  the 
swelling  may  be  sufficient  to  obstruct  respiration  and  to  call  for 
tracheotomy.  Although  delirium  is  occasionally  present  in  erysip- 
elas of  the  head,  and  occurs  in  individuals  of  alcoholic  habits,  it 
must  be  regarded  as  a  symptom  rather  than  as  a  complication,  and 
it  rarely  indicates  the  existence  of  active  meningitis.  The  delirium 
frequently  improves  during  the  administration  of  alcohol  and  of 
tonic  remedies.  Pulmonary  complications,  such  as  pleurisy  or 
pneumonia,  may  occasionally  occur,  and  should  be  dealt  with  on 
ordinary  principles. 

Erysipelas  causes  the  greatest  anxiety  when  it  occurs  in  old  people 
of  deficient  vitality  and  in  those  whose  constitutions  have  previously 
been  weakened,  either  by  the  existence  of  chronic  kidney  disease 
or  by  frequent  alcoholic  excesses.  Under  these  three  conditions  the 
pulse  frequently  shows  signs  of  failure,  and  alcoholic  stimulants  will 
be  constantly  needed. 

Hydrophobia  (Rabies).  Rabies,  or  hydrophobia,  has  been  defined 
as  an  acute  disease  of  animals  dependent  upon  a  specific  virus,  and 
communicated  by  inoculation  to  man.  The  symptoms  of  this  dis- 
ease are  marked  by  a  premonitory  stage  of  irritability,  discomfort, 
and  depression.     Occasionally  also,  during  this  stage,  which  is  of 


474  SPECIFIC  INFECTIOUS  DISEASES. 

variable  duration,  the  voice  may  be  somewhat  altered,  and  the  tem- 
perature slightly  raised.  Much  more  severe  symptoms  follow,  in 
which  spasm  of  the  muscles  of  the  larynx  and  of  the  oesophagus  has 
given  rise  to  the  common  term  of  hydrophobia,  since  these  spasms 
may  be  excited  by  any  attempt  to  swallow. 

In  this  stage,  which  usually  lasts  but  one,  two,  or  three  days, 
there  may  be  violent  maniacal  symptoms  during  the  spasmodic 
attacks,  though  during  the  intervals  consciousness  is  retained.  The 
concluding  stage  of  paralytic  symptoms  is  marked  by  gradual  loss 
of  consciousness  and  by  progressive  weakness  of  the  circulation,  and 
death  finally  occurs  with  syncope. 

The  disease  depends  upon  the  introduction  of  the  virus  from  an 
infected  animal,  which  in  this  country  is  chiefly  the  dog,  though 
cats  are  also  subject  to  the  disease,  and  wolves  are  frequently  rabid. 
Only  a  small  proportion  of  those  bitten  by  rabid  dogs  develop 
symptoms  of  hydrophobia,  the  proportion,  according  to  Horsley, 
not  exceeding  15  per  cent. 

Until  the  introduction  of  the  Pasteur  treatment  a  large  propor- 
tion of  those  definitely  affected  with  this  disease  died.  Much,  how- 
ever, can  undoubtedly  be  done  to  prevent  the  occurrence  of  symp- 
toms by  the  prompt  treatment  of  the  site  of  injury,  and  this  treatment 
should  always  be  carried  out  without  delay  after  the  bite  of  a  dog, 
presumably  rabid,  pending  the  establishment  of  the  rabid  character. 
The  most  effective  measures  are  the  use  of  the  actual  cautery,  or  of 
silver  nitrate,  which  should  be  employed  freely.  Even  when  these 
are  not  available,  benefit  appears  to  result  from  excision  of  the  dam- 
aged tissues  and  from  promoting  free  bleeding. 

When  the  premonitory  symptoms  have  occurred,  the  treatment  is 
almost  confined  either  to  the  use  of  palliative  measures  or  to  the 
adoption  of  the  Pasteur  treatment.  The  palliative  measures  consist 
in  the  use  of  remedies  by  which  the  frequency  of  the  spasmodic 
attacks  may  be  reduced.  The  patient  should  be  kept  at  rest  in  a 
darkened  room,  and  all  forms  of  excitement,  such  as  might  be 
occasioned  by  startling  noises  or  bright  lights,  or  even  by  the  pres- 
ence of  many  people  in  the  room,  should  be  avoided. 

At  one  time  it  was  customary  to  treat  the  symptoms  of  the  pre- 
monitory stage  with  full  doses  of  chloral  hydrate  or  of  potassium 
bromide,  but  these  drugs  are  of  very  little  service  in  this  disease, 
and  they  do  not  suffice  to  calm  anxiety  or  to  ward  off  the  onset  of 
the  paroxysmal  stage ;  accordingly  they  are  now  rarely  employed. 


HYDROPHOBIA.  475 

and,  failing  facilities  for  the  adoption  of  the  Pasteur  treatment, 
greater  reliance  should  be  placed  upon  the  hypodermatic  injection  of 
full  doses  of  morphine. 

It  is  sometimes  recommended  that  with  the  onset  of  the  spasms, 
chloroform  should  be  administered  to  check  their  severity.  This 
is,  however,  a  somewhat  hazardous  proceeding,  owing  to  the  violent 
character  of  the  convulsions. 

With  the  onset  of  the  paroxysmal  stage  tracheotomy  has  occa- 
sionally been  advocated,  but  although  this  operation  to  some  extent 
relieves  the  symptoms  of  urgent  dyspnoea,  it  does  not  control  the 
spasmodic  contractions  of  the  muscles.  In  this  stage  it  is  better  to 
avoid  the  use  of  any  form  of  nourishment  by  the  mouth,  since  all 
attempts  to  feed  the  patient  are  likely  to  be  followed  by  spasm  ; 
hence  efforts  to  maintain  strength  should  be  limited  to  the  use  of 
nutrient  enemata.  Spraying  the  pharynx  with  cocaine  has  some- 
times been  advocated  in  the  hope  of  facilitating  the  introduction  of 
nourishment,  but  this  spray  may  itself  excite  spasm,  or,  if  used  too 
vigorously,  it  may  produce  dangerous  cardiac  depression. 

Although  it  has  been  stated  that  life  may  possibly  be  prolonged  if 
the  severity  of  the  attack  can  be  controlled  until  the  poison  is  elim- 
inated, any  treatment  other  than  that  of  Pasteur  is  rarely  followed 
by  favorable  results  when  marked  symptoms  of  this  disease  have 
occurred,  although  in  the  condition  known  as  spurious  hydrophobia, 
or  pseudorabies — a  condition  which  is  neurotic  rather  than  toxic — 
favorable  results  may  be  obtained  from  almost  any  form  of  treatment. 

The  Pasteur  treatment  depends  upon  successive  inoculations  of 
rabbits  with  virus  obtained  from  the  brain  of  a  mad  dog,  the  virus 
appearing  to  accumulate  in  the  spinal  cord  of  these  rabbits.  The 
amount  of  virus  retained  within  the  cord  diminishes  gradually  when 
the  cords  are  preserved  in  dry  air.  Pasteur  commences  treatment 
by  injecting  an  emulsion  from  a  spinal  cord  fourteen  days  old/  and 
on  each  subsequent  day  an  emulsion  from  a  cord  dried  one  day  less 
than  that  used  on  the  previous  day,  until  the  virus  is  reached  only 
two  or  three  days  removed  from  the  strength  of  ordinary  "  street " 
rabies. 

The  statistics  of  the  Pasteur  Institute  show  an  extraordinarily 
low  death-rate  as  the  result  of  the  treatment,  although  it  is  stated 
that  the  great  majority  of  those  treated  at  the  Paris  Pasteur  Insti- 

^  Foster.     Practical  Therapeutics,  vol.  i.  p.  82. 


476  SPECIFIC  INFECTIOUS  DISEASES. 

tute  have  undoubtedly  been  bitten  by  dogs  wbich,  on  examination, 
have  been  declared  to  be  rabid.  This  treatment  has  also  been  car- 
ried out  at  the  Pasteur  Institute  in  New  York,  and  in  104  persons 
thus  treated  no  deaths  are  recorded,  although  in  47  of  these  persons 
the  bite  had  been  inflicted  by  animals  whose  rabies  was  either  declared 
by  experimentation  or  by  the  deaths  of  other  persons  or  animals 
who  had  been  bitten  by  them,  while  42  had  been  wounded  by 
animals  whose  condition  was  recognized  only  by  clinical  or  veter- 
inary examination. 

Notwithstanding  these  brilliant  results,  it  must  be  remembered 
that  the  effect  of  treatment  appears  to  be  largely  dependent  upon 
its  employment  soon  after  the  injury  has  been  inflicted,  and  it  must 
also  be  remembered  that  some  observers  maintain  that  it  is  possible 
to  communicate  hydrophobia  by  these  inoculations. 

More  recently  Tizzoni  has  recommended  the  use  of  an  extract 
obtained  from  the  central  nervous  system  of  rabid  animals,  and 
claims  that  this  possesses  the  advantage  over  the  Pasteur  treatment 
of  not  producing  any  harmful  action,  local  or  general,  and  of  not 
communicating  hydrophobia.  To  be  of  any  material  service,  this 
treatment  should  be  commenced  not  later  than  the  fourth  day  after 
infection. 

In  view  of  the  great  mortality  of  those  actually  affected  by  rabies, 
these  inoculations  demand  respectful  consideration,  but  in  estimating 
the  results  of  treatment  it  is  well  to  bear  in  mind  the  comparatively 
small  percentage  of  those  who,  having  been  bitten  by  rabid  animals, 
subsequently  develop  symptoms  of  hydrophobia. 

Lockjaw  (^Tetanus).  Tetanus  depends  upon  the  introduction  of 
a  bacillus,  or  of  poison  developed  by  a  bacillus,  which  may  be  found 
in  earth  or  in  putrefying  fluids  or  in  manure.  The  introduction  of 
this  bacillus  is  in  general  effected  through  an  open  wound.  The 
disease  appears  to  bs  peculiarly  rife  in  certain  districts. 

The  convulsions  form  the  leading  features  of  this  disease ;  these 
may  affect  either  the  whole  body  or  only  the  muscles  of  the  face 
and  neck.  It  is  unnecessary  here  to  describe  the  typical  symptoms, 
which  I  have  given  elsewhere  in  detail.^  Death  may  occur  during 
the  convulsions,  owing  to  heart  failure  or  owing  to  arrested  respira- 
tion. In  the  case  above  mentioned,  the  fixation  of  the  muscles  of 
respiration  caused  the  greatest  anxiety.     Death  may,  however,  occur 

■^  Lancet,  November  2,  1895. 


LOCKJAW.  477 

in  the  interv^als,  as  the  result  of  exhaustion  in  part  due  to  the  fre- 
quency of  the  convulsions,  in  part  to  the  difficulty  of  maintaining 
nourishment. 

The  treatment  of  tetanus  of  traumatic  origin  demands  careful 
examination  of  the  wound,  the  removal  of  any  sources  of  irritation 
which  may  be  detected,  and  antiseptic  treatment  to  prevent  any  fur- 
ther infection.  Apart  from  these,  the  treatment  involves  measures 
calculated  to  diminish  reflex  excitability,  and  of  late  years  the  dis- 
ease has  been  dealt  with  by  means  of  antitoxin,  with  considerable, 
but  not  invariable,  success.  To  reduce  the  frequency  of  the  spasms 
the  patient  must  be  kept  in  bed  in  a  dark,  quiet  room,  and  only 
those  engaged  in  the  actual  nursing  or  treatment  should  be  admitted. 

The  utmost  care  is  required  to  maintain  nourishment  without  pro- 
voking tetanic  spasms.  Owing  to  the  contraction  of  the  muscles  of 
the  jaws,  the  feeding  is  frequently  rendered  extremely  difficult.  Occa- 
sionally it  is  possible  to  induce  the  patient  to  take  small  quantities  of 
liquid  nourishment  at  frequent  intervals,  but  very  often  the  fixation 
of  the  mouth  renders  this  almost  impossible,  and  it  may  even  be  ad- 
visable either  to  feed  by  means  of  a  nasal  tube,  or  to  employ  chloro- 
form previous  to  the  administration  of  food  by  the  tube,  or  to  resort 
to  the  use  of  nutrient  enemata. 

The  remedies  that  have  been  recommended  are  those  calculated 
to  diminish  reflex  excitability.  Morphine  has  been  used  hypoder- 
matically,  and  chloral  hydrate  and  potassium  bromide  have  been  given 
in  full  doses  by  the  mouth ;  but  since  the  disease  is  fairly  frequent 
in  children  it  is  often  undesirable  to  use  either  opium  or  morphine, 
and,  failing  antitoxin,  reliance  must  be  placed  upon  the  use  of  com- 
paratively large  doses  of  potassium  bromide  and  chloral  hydrate.  It 
must  be  noted,  however,  that  with  fractious  children  much  strug- 
gling is  sometimes  excited  by  the  attempt  to  administer  any  drug 
by  the  mouth,  and  the  effort  must  not  be  too  persistently  made  if 
convulsive  spasms  are  excited. 

Numerous  other  remedies — such  as  Calabar  bean,  cannabis  indica, 
belladonna,  quinine,  strychnine,  and  cocaine — have  been  recom- 
mended at  various  times.  Those  which  can  be  administered  hypo- 
dermatically  may  be  tried,  though  there  is  little  likelihood  that  strych- 
nine can  exert  any  beneficial  influence  in  this  complaint  other  than 
the  stimulation  of  the  heart  if  the  circulation  is  depressed,  either  as 
the  result  of  the  disease  or  in  consequence  of  the  administration  of 
large  doses  of  chloral  hydrate. 


478  SPECIFIC  INFECTIO  US  DISEASES. 

The  tetanus  antitoxin  already  mentioned  is  used  in  doses  of  from 
10  c.c.  to  20  c.c.  injected  subcutaneously  every  six  or  twelve  hours. 
The  frequency  of  administration  and  the  amount  of  the  dose  are 
regulated  by  the  frequency  and  also  by  the  severity  of  the  convul- 
sions. In  the  single  case  in  which  I  employed  this  remedy  the  effect 
was  to  reduce  both  the  frequency  and  the  severity  of  the  convulsions, 
and  although  prior  to  the  employment  of  the  antitoxin  the  case 
appeared  to  be  hopeless,  yet  success  followed  this  treatment.  It  is 
well,  however,  to  remember  the  Hippocratic  aphorism  quoted  by 
Osier,  that  such  persons  as  are  seized  with  tetanus  die  within  four 
days,  or,  if  they  survive  this  period,  they  recover. 

The  success  of  the  treatment  to  some  extent  appears  to  depend 
upon  its  early  employment.  In  the  Year-Booh  of  Treatment  for 
1899,  p.  87,  there  are  references  to  the  use  of  this  remedy,  and  the 
general  conclusion  is  that  tetanus  antitoxin  has  a  distinct  value, 
especially  in  those  cases  which  have  not  had  a  very  short  incuba- 
tion period,  and  where  it  has  been  given  in  the  early  stage  soon 
after  the  symptoms  have  commenced.  It  may  be  mentioned  that 
although  in  general  the  antitoxin  is  injected  subcutaneously,  Roux 
and  Borrel  suggest  that  it  should  be  introduced  into  the  substance 
of  the  brain.  Reference  is  made  in  the  Year-Booh  of  Treatment  for 
1899,  p.  191,  to  some  few  cases  in  which  this  method  has  been 
adopted,  but  further  observations  must  be  made  in  this  direction 
before  it  is  possible  to  speak  definitely  of  the  results. 

Malarial  Fevers  [Intermittent,  Remittent,  Pernicious).  It  is  not 
within  the  scope  of  this  book  to  discuss  the  recent  advances  in  con- 
nection with  the  etiology  and  pathology  of  the  various  forms  of 
malarial  fevers.  It  will  be  sufficient  to  indicate  the  growing  belief 
that  these  conditions  depend  upon  the  presence  in  the  blood  of  an 
organism,  the  plasmodium  malarise,  which  is  found  in  various  forms 
in  different  types  of  intermittent  or  remittent  fevers. 

So  far  as  treatment  is  concerned,  there  is  also  comparatively  little 
advantage  in  making  distinctions  between  intermittent  fever,  remit- 
tent fevers,  and  the  pernicious  form.  In  all  three  the  essential 
treatment  must  be  somewhat  different,  according  to  the  period  at 
which  advice  has  been  sought.  Thus  it  will  be  necessary  to  con- 
sider, first,  treatment  during  the  intervals  between  the  separate 
attacks  during  the  acute  stage  ;  second,  treatment  during  the  attack  ; 
and,  third,  treatment  of  the  sequelae  of  different  forms  of  malarial 
fever. 


MALARIAL  FEVERS.  47^ 

With  regard  to  intermittent  fever,  quinine  must  certainly  be 
administered  during  the  intervals  between  separate  attacks,  and 
the  mode  of  administration  to  some  extent  depends  upon  the 
severity  of  the  case  and  upon  the  local  practice. 

In  America,  where  malaria  is  common,  large  doses  of  quinine 
are  given  in  the  intervals  between  the  separate  paroxysms,  and  the 
greatest  benefit  is  claimed  for  the  administration  of  quinine  in  single 
large  doses  some  two  to  three  hours  before  the  paroxysm  is  expected 
to  occur.  It  is  maintained  that  the  results  are  far  better  than  when 
a  similar  large  dose  is  given  almost  immediately  before  the  onset  of 
the  paroxysm,  since  the  former  practice  allows  of  the  absorption  of 
quinine  and  of  its  action  at  the  time  that  the  specific  organism  of  this 
disease  is  in  full  development. 

It  is  also  claimed  that  the  action  of  quinine  is  increased  when  the 
intestine  is  acting  freely,  and  that  there  is  considerable  advantage, 
therefore,  in  giving  calomel  or  some  other  purgative  some  four  or 
five  hours  before  the  quinine  is  employed.  When,  however,  large 
doses  are  used,  they  are  extremely  apt  to  produce  vomiting  if  given 
by  the  mouth,  and  it  will  accordingly  be  desirable  to  allay  reflex 
excitability  by  the  simultaneous  use  of  potassium  bromide  or  of 
diluted  hydrobromic  acid  ;  the  latter  to  a  great  extent  checks  the 
undesirable  symptoms  of  cinchonism  or  quinism,  at  the  same  time 
that  it  reduces  vomiting.  If,  in  spite  of  these,  vomiting  still  results 
after  the  administration  of  10  to  20  grains  of  quinine,  it  may  be 
necessary  to  introduce  the  drug  into  the  system  by  other  channels, 
as,  for  example,  by  the  hypodermatic  injection  of  the  solution  or  by 
the  use  of  quinine  as  a  suppository. 

Of  the  official  forms  of  quinine  the  sulphate  has  perhaps  the 
greatest  reputation,  but  this  is  extremely  insoluble,  and,  whether 
used  by  the  mouth  or  by  hypodermatic  injection,  requires  the  pres- 
ence of  a  mineral  acid.  Quinine  hydrochlorate  and  acid  quinine 
hydrochlorate  are  more  soluble,  the  latter,  which  has  recently  been 
introduced  into  the  British  Pharmacopoeia,  dissolving  in  rather  less 
than  its  own  weight  of  water  and  yielding  a  slightly  acid  solution. 
It  is  probable  that  these  forms  of  quinine  will  almost  entirely  super- 
sede the  older  form,  since  they  can  be  so  much  more  easily  dis- 
pensed, and  the  solution  of  the  acid  hydrochlorate  is  so  much  less 
irritating  than  the  solutions  of  quinine  sulphate  made  with  free 
mineral  acid. 

With  the  onset  of  a  severe  attack  of  malarial  fever,  it  is  perhaps 


480  SPECIFIC  INFECTIOUS  DISEASES. 

more  customary  to  employ  the  single  large  dose  of  quinine  in  the 
manner  above  mentioned.  In  England,  where  the  type  is  less  severe, 
small  doses  are  perhaps  more  usually  given  during  the  intervals  be- 
tween different  paroxysms,  particularly  in  quotidian  ague,  as  the  form 
most  commonly  seen,  tertian  and  quartan  being  comparatively  rare. 
The  treatment  does  not  require  modification  on  account  of  the  par- 
ticular form  of  ague.  I  have  seen  a  complete  cure  of  a  severe  attack 
of  quartan  ague  follow  the  administration  of  5  grains  of  quinine 
sulphate  in  an  acid  solution  three  times  a  day. 

Numerous  other  remedies  have  been  advocated  as  substitutes  for 
quinine,  and  their  recommendation  has,  perhaps,  been  partly  due  to 
the  former  high  price  of  this  drug.  This  objection  to  the  use  of 
quinine  has  of  late  been  removed,  owing  largely  to  improved 
methods  of  production  ;  and  although  some  remedies,  such  as  arsenic, 
appear  to  act  as  prophylactics  and  to  diminish  the  risks  of  exposure 
to  malarial  influences,  they  do  not  exert  the  same  curative  effect. 
When,  however,  the  supply  of  quinine  is  limited,  it  is  well  to  re- 
member that  arsenious  acid  may  be  beneficial,  if  pushed  judiciously 
during  the  intervals  between  the  paroxysms,  while  Warburg's  tinc- 
ture has  been  strongly  recommended,  on  account  of  its  powerful 
diaphoretic  and  antiperiodic  properties. 

Two  remedies  which  have  been  employed  in  malarial  fever  deserve 
mention — namely,  euchinine,  which  was  introduced  as  a  substitute 
for  quinine,  and  methylene-blue,  for  which  special  advantages  have 
been  claimed. 

St.  George  Gray'  gives  his  experience  of  euchinine  in  malarial 
fevers,  and  maintains  that  it  is  superior  to  quinine  in  being  tasteless 
and  in  requiring  a  smaller  dose  to  reduce  the  temperature.  He 
considers  that  10  or  15  grains  of  euchinine  are  as  efficacious  as.  20 
to  30  grains  of  quinine  sulphate,  but  he  finds  that  it  nearly  always 
causes  buzzing  in  the  ears,  if  not  other  symptoms  of  cinchonism. 
He  lays  stress  upon  the  smaller  dose  and  upon  the  tasteless  char- 
acter, considering  the  latter  the  chief  advantage  over  quinine. 

Methylene-blue^  has  been  recommended  in  cases  of  malaria  where 
quinine  had  proved  useless  or  where  there  was  intolerance  of  quinine. 
Cardamatis  has  used  it  in  a  very  large  number  of  cases,  apparently 
with  success.     In  some  of  his  cases  he  has  found  it  advisable  to  use 


British  Medical  Journal,  February  26,  1898. 
Year-Book  of  Treatment,  1899,  p.  441. 


MALABIAL  FEVERS.  481 

both  methylene-blue  and  quinine,  but  in  the  large  majority  he  em- 
ployed methylene-blue  alone.  According  to  his  account,  the  draw- 
backs include  staining  of  the  tongue  and  lips,  and  sometimes  a  slight 
amount  of  cystitis.  He  considers  that  patients  are  not  only  cured 
of  existing  malaria,  but  that  they  are  also  rendered  immune,  so  that 
they  may  continue  to  reside  in  malarial  districts  with  but  little  dan- 
ger of  subsequent  attacks.  The  daily  dose  is  from  10  to  12  grains 
for  adults,  and  the  drug  is  to  be  administered  in  intermittent  fever 
some  ten  hours  before  the  beginning  of  the  paroxysm. 

With  the  development  of  ague  it  is  desirable  to  remove  the  patient 
from  the  malarial  district  at  the  earliest  opportunity,  unless  the  dis- 
ease yields  quickly  to  treatment  with  quinine. 

With  regard  to  the  treatment  during  the  paroxysm,  this  must  to 
a  great  extent  depend  upon  the  stage.  The  ordinary  succession  of 
events  is  as  follows  :  a  cold  stage  of  short  duration,  lasting  usually 
about  fifteen  minutes,  forms  the  commencement  of  the  attack,  and 
during  this  time  there  will  be  much  headache  and  perhaps  nausea 
and  vomiting.  The  symptoms  resemble  those  of  a  rigor,  with  great 
depression  and  shivering,  while  the  temperature  rises  rapidly  to  104° 
or  105°  F.  or  more.  During  the  cold  stage  very  little  can  be  done 
to  promote  comfort.  The  patient  should  be  kept  in  bed  and  covered 
with  blankets,  and  warm  drinks  may  perhaps  be  given.  When  a  full 
meal  has  recently  been  taken,  vomiting  should  be  induced,  either  by 
the  use  of  an  emetic  or  by  copious  draughts  of  warm  water.  It  is 
quite  useless,  when  the  attack  has  commenced,  to  attempt  to  admin- 
ister quinine,  since  absorption  at  this  time  is  partially  or  wholly 
arrested. 

The  cold  stage  gradually  gives  place  to  a  hot  stage,  and  indeed  in 
some  forms  of  malaria  the  cold  stage  is  either  entirely  absent  or  of 
extremely  short  duration.  During  the  hot  stage,  which  lasts  three 
or  four  hours,  the  temperature  continues  high  and  the  pulse  increases 
in  force  and  rapidity,  while  there  may  be  considerable  headache. 
The  headache  may  to  some  extent  be  relieved  by  the  use  of  cold 
compresses,  and  the  general  discomfort  may  occasionally  be  reduced 
by  sponging  the  body  with  cold  or  tepid  water  and  by  the  use  of 
cooling  drinks. 

It  is  very  rarely  necessary  to  adopt  more  active  measures  for  the 
reduction  of  temperature.  The  antiperiodics  are  of  no  service  for 
the  relief  of  headache  or  fever  in  this  stage  of  the  attack,  while  the 
relatively  short  duration  of  the  fever  renders  the  use  of  the  wet 

31 


482  SPECIFIC  INFECTIOUS  DISEASES. 

pack  or  of  the  vapor  bath  unnecessary  as  a  means  of  reducing  the 
temperature  or  of  promoting  diaphoresis. 

The  hot  stage  is  succeeded  by  the  stage  of  sweating,  during  which 
the  severity  of  the  symptoms  moderates,  the  temperature  falls  rap- 
idly, and  the  relief  of  headache  may  be  followed  by  sleep.  The 
free  perspiration  may  continue  for  nine  or  ten  hours,  or  even  more, 
and  although  it  is  usually  followed  by  considerable  weakness,  the 
contrast  from  the  discomfort  both  of  the  cold  and  of  the  hot  stage 
is  such  that  the  patient  feels  practically  well. 

Daring  the  sweating  stage  comfort  may  be  increased  by  the  use 
of  copious  draughts  of  water,  and  should  there  be  much  exhaustion 
and  weakness,  small  amounts  of  stimulants  may  be  taken,  and  the 
routine  treatment  with  quinine  may  be  commenced. 

In  remittent  fever  the  chief  difference  from  the  intermittent  form 
is  that  the  temperature  continues  above  normal  in  the  intervals  be- 
tween the  febrile  attacks,  but  in  some  forms  of  remittent  fever  the 
second  stage  may  be  absent  and  the  cold  stage  may  be  of  short  dura- 
tion. In  remittent  fever  vomiting  is  somewhat  more  common,  and 
jaundice  may  also  arise. 

The  treatment  of  remittent  fever  does  not  materially  differ  from 
that  of  intermittent  fever,  though  the  continuance  of  the  febrile 
state  indicates  that  the  patient  should  be  kept  in  bed  in  the  inter- 
vals between  the  hot  stages,  instead  of  being  allowed  to  get  up  and 
dress.  The  special  symptoms  of  vomiting  and  jaundice  may  call 
for  treatment  on  general  principles,  while  the  febrile  condition  may 
be  dealt  with  by  the  administration  of  ammonium  acetate  in  addi- 
tion to  quinine. 

In  the  pernicious  form  of  malaria  hsematuria  may  arise,  or  blood- 
coloring  matter  may  be  separated  from  the  corpuscles.  This  form  is 
frequently  rapidly  fatal,  the  symptoms  resembling  those  of  acute 
uraemia,  including  suppression  of  urine,  vomiting,  and  perhaps  either 
coma  or  delirium.  These  symptoms  are  often  followed  by  indications 
of  asthenia.  The  treatment  of  this  condition  involves  the  free  use 
of  quinine  from  the  commencement,  together  with  stimulant  reme- 
dies, such  as  hypodermatic  injections  of  strychnine  and  the  employ- 
ment of  nutrient  enemata,  to  which  some  form  of  alcohol  may  be 
added  with  advantage. 

When,  in  spite  of  these  measures,  there  is  much  depression  of  the 
circulation,  spirit  of  camphor  or  ether  may  be  injected  hypoder- 
matically.     Very  little  can  be  done  for  the  relief  of  the  hsematuria  or 


ASIATIC  CHOLERA.  483 

the  hsemoglobinuria;  both  of  which  so  profoundly  weaken  the  patient. 
So  soon  as  convalescence  appears  to  be  established,  however,  astrin- 
gent remedies  may  be  administered,  such  as  alum  in  5-grain  doses, 
or  ferric  chloride,  or  the  iron  arsenate.  Unhappily,  however,  in  the 
majority  of  cases  of  pernicious  malaria  there  is  no  opportunity  for 
the  use  of  these  remedies. 

With  regard  to  the  treatment  of  the  cachexia  which  results  from 
malarial  fever,  this  should  be  dealt  with  partly  by  change  of  air  and 
partly  by  the  frequent  exhibition  of  iron,  quinine,  or  arsenic.  The 
compound  syrup  of  hypophosphites  is  often  of  service  in  restoring 
strength  and  vigor  after  an  attack  of  malaria.  The  anaemia,  how- 
ever, may  be  extreme  and  persistent,  and  will  call  for  the  prolonged 
use  of  various  forms  of  iron.  The  tendency  to  relapses  must  also 
be  remembered,  and  this  liability  may  to  some  extent  be  counter- 
acted partly  by  tonic  measures  and  partly  by  the  adoption  of  warm 
clothing,  since  it  is  generally  found  that  slight  changes  of  tempera- 
ture, or  even  cold  draughts  playing  upon  some  exposed  portion  of 
the  body,  may  be  sufficient  to  determine  the  occurrence  of  malarial 
discomforts,  or  even  to  provoke  a  distinct  attack  of  ague. 

Asiatic  Cholera.  The  dependence  of  this  disease  upon  the  de- 
velopment of  the  cholera  bacillus  of  Koch  has  only  been  recognized 
of  late  years,  but  this  dependence  has  already  furnished  the  basis 
for  great  advances  in  the  prophylactic  treatment.  The  chief  symp- 
toms of  the  disease  is  profuse  diarrhoea,  speedily,  followed  by  collapse, 
which,  in  favorable  cases,  gives  place  in  turn  to  symptoms  of  reac- 
tion. 

The  treatment,  therefore,  must  be  adapted  to  these  several  con- 
ditions, but  more  interesting  than  the  treatment  of  the  disease  is 
that  which  is  intended  to  check  the  liability  of  those  likely  to  be  in- 
fected. This  prophylactic  treatment  was  first  performed  in  Spain 
by  the  injection  of  attenuated  cholera  poison,  and  gave  rise  to  much 
discussion.  Since  1893,  however,  Haffkine  has  been  making  pro- 
tective inoculations  in  India  on  a  very  large  scale,  and  his  observa- 
tions have  been  confirmed  by  experiments  made  in  Paris,  and  also 
by  use  of  the  anticholera  serum  in  Japan. 

The  preliminary  symptoms  of  cholera  are  abdominal  pains,  with 
diarrhoea  and  depression,  and  these  symptoms  may  last  for  one  or 
two  days  before  the  onset  or  occurrence  of  the  stage  of  collapse. 
There  was  at  one  time  much  discussion  concerning  the  propriety  of 
checking  choleraic  diarrhoea,  and  the  late  Sir  George  Johnson  was 


484  SPECIFIC  INFECTIO  US  DISEASES. 

strongly  in  favor  of  encouraging  this  symptom  by  giving  castor  oil, 
on  the  hypothesis  that  the  diarrhoea  served  to  eliminate  the  poison. 

Others  have  attempted  to  treat  this  disease  on  the  principles  of  in- 
testinal antisepsis,  as,  for  example,  by  the  administration  of  calomel 
in  place  of  castor  oil  with  the  first  onset  of  the  diarrhoea,  or  of  salol, 
or  of  bismuth  salicylate,  while  thymol  and  betanaphthol  have  also 
been  recommended. 

The  present  tendency  is,  however,  to  endeavor  to  control  the  diar- 
rhoea as  early  as  possible  by  the  employment  of  astringents  and  of 
opium,  and  it  is  urged  that  opium  is  of  considerable  service  not  only 
in  diminishing  the  frequency  of  the  motions,  but  also  in  relieving 
the  cramp-like  pains  which  accompany  the  diarrhoea,  and  are  most 
marked  in  the  stage  of  collapse. 

Opium  is  sometimes  given  alone  in  the  form  of  the  tincture,  or, 

if  the  pains  are  very  severe,  it  is  injected  hypodermatically.    It  may, 

however,  be  made  into  a  mixture  with  astringents.     In  1892  the 

College  of  Physicians  of  London  recommended  the  employment  of 

the  following  two  mixtures  with  the  earliest  indications  of  choleraic 

diarrhoea :' 

T. 

R. — Salicylate  of  bismuth  and  cerium   .         .         .         .  gr.  v. 

Compound  powder  of  cinnamon  ( B.  P. )  .         .  gr.  vijss. 

Camphorated  tincture  of  opium      ....  ITLxxx. 

Compound  tincture  of  chloroform  ( B.  P. )  and 

aromatic  spirit  of  ammonia         .         .         .       aa  TTLxx. 

Essence  of  peppermint  ......  Tti^- 

Chalk  mixture        .         .         .         .         .       q.  s.  ad  ,^j. 
Dose.  — One  ounce  every  three  or  four  hours. 

Should  it  disagree,  or  in  twenty-four  hours  fail  to  give  relief,  the 
following  mixture  should  be  substituted  : 

II. 

R. — Aromatic  sulphuric  acid  .....     ITLxv. 

Camphorated  tincture  of  opium      ....     TTLxxx. 

Compound  tincture  of  chloroform  ( B.  P. )  and 

tincture  of  coto  .....       aa     1T|,xx. 

Syrup  of  orange  flower  .         .         .         .         .         •      3J- 

Peppermint  water  .         .         .         .         .       q.  s.  ad     §j. 
Dose. — One  ounce  every  three  or  four  hours. 

A  somewhat  similar  prescription  was  recommended  by  the  Board 
of  Health,  but  in  this  only  a  small  proportion  of  tincture  of  opium 

^  Martindale.     Extra  Pharmacopoeia,  1898,  p.  96. 


ASIATIC  CHOLERA. 


485 


is  employed^  and  the  value  of  the  mixture  is  mainly  dependent  upon 
the  astringents  it  contains  •? 


R. — Aromatic  confection  (B.  P. )  . 

Aromatic  spirit  of  ammonia  . 

Tincture  of  catechu 

Compound  tincture  of  cardamoms 

Tincture  of  opium . 

Chalk  mixture 
( Equals  one  dose. ) 


q.  s. 


ad 


gr.  IX. 

TTlix. 

TTLxxx. 

tn  ^viij. 
miij. 


These  prescriptions  are  all  perhaps  almost  too  elaborate  for  em- 
ployment on  occasions  of  emergency,  when  it  will  be  necessary  to 
trust  to  remedies  of  a  more  simple  and  available  character,  as,  for 
example,  the  administration  of  10  drops  of  aromatic  sulphuric  acid 
with  20  drops  of  laudanum,  to  be  repeated  every  two  hours  until 
the  patient  is  fully  under  the  influence  of  opium  or  until  the  symp- 
toms show  signs  of  improvement.  To  this  mixture  5  to  10  drops 
of  spirit  of  camphor  may  be  added. 

During  the  stage  of  collapse,  severe  diarrhoea  and  vomiting  are 
generally  present ;  the  latter  symptom  precludes  the  employment  of 
any  remedy  by  the  mouth.  It  will  then  be  necessary  to  use  morphine 
hypodermatically  to  relieve  pain  and  to  check  diarrhoea.  In  addition, 
hypodermatic  injections  of  ether  will  often  be  found  to  improve  the 
quality  of  the  pulse  and  to  diminish  discomfort.  The  duration  of 
collapse  may  sometimes  be  shortened  by  the  use  of  hot  applications 
to  the  hands  and  feet,  or  by  warm  fomentations  applied  over  the 
abdomen.  If  vomiting  is  not  severe,  thirst  is  commonly  present 
and  may  be  relieved  by  copious  draughts  of  water,  which  may 
sometimes  be  retained  with  greater  facility  if  ice  has  previously 
been  employed.  When  vomiting  has  been  a  severe  symptom,  small 
doses  of  cocaine,  given  by  the  mouth,  will  sometimes  be  of  service ; 
it  is,  however,  necessary  to  be  very  sparing  in  the  use  of  this  remedy, 
since  it  may  produce  considerable  weakness  of  the  circulation.  When 
the  draughts  of  water  and  the  ice  fail  to  satisfy  the  thirst,  fluid  may 
be  slowly  injected  into  the  rectum,  or  a  simple  saline  solution,  slightly 
warmed,  may  be  slowly  injected  subcutaneously  or  directly  into  a 
vein.  This  form  of  treatment  has  long  been  employed  for  the  relief 
of  the  collapse  of  cholera,  which  to  a  great  extent  appears  to  depend 
upon  the  profuse  drain  of  liquid  from  the  bloodvessels. 

Cantani's  method  is  to  inject  into  the  rectum  3  or  4  pints  of  liquid 


Martindale.     Extra  Pharmacopoeia,  1898,  p.  96. 


486  SPEOIFIG  INFECTIOUS  DISEASES. 

containing  a  very  small  proportion  of  tannin,  and  he  facilitates  the 
introduction  of  this  liquid  by  raising  the  pelvis,  believing  that  the 
fluid  will  then  find  its  way  into  the  small  intestine.  These  injec- 
tions are  to  be  given  after  each  motion,  and  are  employed  mainly 
with  the  view  of  cleansing  the  intestine.  A  very  large  proportion 
of  the  fluid  thus  introduced  is  undoubtedly  returned,  and  for  the 
relief  of  symptoms  of  collapse  the  subcutaneous  or  intravenous 
injections  of  warm  saline  solutions  are  of  greater  service. 

During  the  stage  of  collapse,  when  there  is  but  little  vomiting, 
relief  may  sometimes  be  afforded  by  small  quantities  of  stimulants, 
which  may  be  given  with  hot  coffee  or  hot  tea.  It  is  generally 
found,  however,  that  these  stimulants  must  be  freely  diluted,  since 
if  given  in  concentrated  form  they  favor  vomiting  and  headache. 

During  the  stage  of  reaction  the  amount  of  liquid  taken  by  the 
mouth  may  be  increased,  and  saline  aperients  are  often  useful.  In 
this  stage  there  may  be  complaint  of  lumbar  pain,  and  albumin  or 
blood  may  be  found  in  the  urine.  These  afford  indications  for  the 
use  of  hot  fomentations  over  the  lumbar  region,  and  also  for  the 
administration  of  saline  aperients  in  greater  quantity.  The  stage 
of  reaction  is  also  sometimes  marked  by  indications  of  pulmonary 
engorgement,  which  may  necessitate  the  use  of  fomentations  or 
poultices  over  the  thorax  and  the  administration  of  expectorant 
remedies. 

There  is  little  that  need  be  said  of  the  treatment  during  conva- 
lescence. The  ordinary  tonics,  such  as  iron,  quinine,  and  hydro- 
chloric acid,  will  often  be  of  service. 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

TUBERCULOSIS. 

CurabiKty — Climate  and  Health  Resorts — Open-air  Treatment — Exercise — Clothing 
— Diet — Nordrach  Treatment — General  Medicinal  Treatment — Antiseptic  In- 
halations. 

Tuberculosis.  Under  the  heading  of  tuberculosis  it  will  be  con- 
venient in  this  volume  to  consider  first  the  forms  of  tuberculosis 
which  most  commonly  come  under  the  care  of  the  physician,  namely, 
those  affecting  the  lungs  ;  second,  apart  from  the  general  treatment 
of  this  condition,  to  consider  the  special  treatment  to  be  adopted  in 
view  of  special  symptoms,  complications,  or  sequelse  which  result 
from  tuberculosis  of  the  lungs. 

To  some  extent  this  will  involve  the  consideration  of  tuberculosis 
as  affecting  other  viscera,  but  in  these  chapters  the  symptoms  will 
be  considered  only  as  complications  of  what  is  ordinarily  called 
pulmonary  phthisis. 

The  distinction  between  pulmonary  tuberculosis  and  tuberculosis 
affecting  other  viscera  is  to  some  extent  artificial,  and  conditions 
which  are  for  the  sake  of  convenience  regarded  as  sequelae  may, 
under  some  circumstances,  constitute  the  primary  disease ;  for  ex- 
ample, tuberculosis  may  primarily  and  mainly  affect  the  mesenteric 
glands  and  the  intestine,  while  the  affection  of  the  lung,  if  any,  is 
of  minor  importance.  Or,  again,  the  tubercular  process  may  affect 
the  vessels  of  the  brain,  constituting  tubercular  meningitis  where  the 
tubercular  taint  is  undoubted,  but  where  its  extension  to  the  lungs 
or  to  other  organs  forms  no  necessary  part  of  the  disease.  Then, 
again,  independently  of  these  conditions — which  may  be  regarded 
as  the  medical  forms  of  tuberculosis,  and  accordingly  fall  within 
the  scope  of  this  book — there  are  other  conditions  which  come  more 
particularly  under  the  notice  of  the  surgeon,  where  the  tubercular 
affection  acts  mainly  upon  the  joints,  the  bones,  or  the  skin.  To 
some  extent  these  have  in  recent  years  been  found  amenable  to  some 
of  the  methods  of  treatment  recently  advocated  for  pulmonary  tuber- 
culosis, and  in  so  far  as  they  are  to  be  dealt  with  by  general  or  by 


488  TUBERCULOSIS. 

constitutional  treatment  they  will  find  mention  in  this  work,  while 
considerations  of  any  surgical  measures  which  may  be  necessary 
will,  of  course,  be  excluded. 

With  regard  to  pulmonary  tuberculosis  the  question  of  curability 
has  of  late  years  come  into  extreme  prominence  since  the  discovery 
of  the  bacillary  origin  of  the  disease.  So  long  as  it  was  thought 
that  the  disease  was  hereditary,  treatment  seemed  of  little  avail, 
and  was  perhaps  too  purely  concerned  with  the  treatment  of  special 
symptoms  ;  but  the  discovery  of  the  dependence  of  the  disease  upon 
the  growth,  and  consequent  irritation,  of  bacilli  has  led  to  innumer- 
able experiments  and  to  many  new  modes  of  treatment,  all  with  the 
object  of  checking  the  growth  of  the  bacilli  and  many  intended  to 
cause  their  death,  and  by  so  doing  to  arrest  the  tubercular  process. 
There  can  be  no  doubt,  however,  that  the  discovery  of  the  bacillus 
has  not  completely  elucidated  the  whole  question  of  tuberculosis, 
and  that  although  the  disease  is  due  to  infection,  and  is,  therefore, 
communicable,  yet  the  dangers  to  the  individual  are  to  some  extent 
subject  to  hereditary  predisposition.  All  Avho  have  had  careful, 
well-authenticated  details  of  the  family  history  of  consumptives 
brought  before  them  must  have  realized  the  importance  of  hered- 
itary predisposition ;  for  instance,  there  can  be  no  reason  to  doubt 
that  in  hospital  out-patient  rooms,  and  in  other  places  where  people 
suffering  from  consumption  are  crowded  together,  the  students,  the 
doctors,  and  nurses  must  be  frequently  inhaling  the  tubercle  bacilli, 
and  the  comparative  immunity  of  the  majority  seems  to  depend,  not 
upon  the  non-absorption  of  these  bacilli,  but  upon  some  process  by 
which  the  vitality  of  the  bacilli  is  arrested,  unless  the  individual  is 
from  heredity  predisposed  to  the  disease. 

Further,  with  regard  to  the  germicidal  treatment  of  tuberculosis, 
in  reading  the  following  pages  it  must  be  remembered  that  although 
numerous  drugs  have  the  power  of  destroying  the  bacilli,  when  the 
question  is  regarded  purely  from  the  experimental  or  laboratory  side, 
their  efficacy  is  more  open  to  doubt  when  the  bacilli  have  to  be 
reached  in  the  interior  of  the  lung,  and  it  becomes  somewhat  prob- 
lematical how  far  it  is  desirable  to  adopt,  or  to  continue  to  employ, 
remedies  of  undoubted  germicidal  power  if  these  also  possess  the 
power  of  exciting  further  irritation.  If  it  were  possible  to  confine 
the  action  of  certain  of  these  germicides  to  the  small  area  affected, 
the  gerinicidal  treatment  of  tuberculosis  could  be  undertaken  more 
hopefully ;  but  the  problem  we  have  to  face  is  how  to  kill  the 


TUBERCULOSIS.  489 

bacilli  without  at  the  same  time  irritating  the  lungs  or  the  air 
passages  by  the  strength  of  the  remedies  we  employ. 

In  recent  times  the  treatment  of  tuberculosis  has  received  a  fresh 
impetus  in  the  enthusiastic  recommendation  of  the  open-air  treat- 
ment. It  has  long  been  known  that  some  cases  of  tuberculosis 
would  improve  if  removed  from  their  ordinary  conditions  of  life 
into  circumstances  where  a  large  part  of  the  day  could  be  spent  in 
the  open  air,  more  particularly  if  the  open  air  was  fairly  free  from 
damp,  dust,  fog,  or  other  impurity ;  and  on  this  account  patients 
have  been  sent  on  long  sea  voyages,  or  to  high  altitudes,  or  to 
southern  health  resorts,  where,  though  the  conditions  have  varied 
very  greatly,  yet  improvement  has  been  claimed  in  each  case,  the 
whole  secret  appearing  to  lie  not  so  much  in  expatriation  as  in 
alteration  of  the  surroundings  and  mode  of  life  of  the  individual. 
One  of  the  primary  factors  in  this  treatment  lies  in  the  establishment 
of  a  hopeful  spirit,  which  will  convince  the  patient  of  the  desira- 
bility of  breaking  through  his  former  habit  of  living  in  heated  rooms 
with  closed  windows,  and  of  dreading  draughts  and  fresh  air  generally. 

With  these  preliminary  remarks  it  will  be  necessary  now  to  turn 
to  the  details  of  treatment  of  cases  of  pulmonary  tuberculosis.  The 
first  essential  is  to  consider  how  far  in  the  individual  case  it  is  pos- 
sible to  influence  the  tuberculous  process  beneflcially  by  change  of 
residence.  To  some  extent  the  alteration  in  the  surroundings  must 
be  determined  by  the  patient's  means,  since  notwithstanding  the 
charms  of  southern  health  resorts,  with  their  brightness  of  color  and 
sunshine,  it  is  frequently  impossible  for  the  patient  to  meet  the  ex- 
penses involved  in  the  journey  and  living ;  but  even  when  expense 
does  not  affect  the  question,  some  cases  of  tuberculosis  are  wholly 
unfit  to  face  the  risks  and  discomforts  of  a  long  journey,  more  par- 
ticularly should  this  journey  have  to  be  performed  alone.  From 
the  physical  side,  the  conditions  which  preclude  such  journeys  are 
great  fluctuations  of  temperature  or  a  persistence  of  high  tempera- 
ture, the  existence  of  much  evidence  of  pneumonic  consolidation,  the 
extent  to  which  the  individual  suffers  from  night-sweats,  or  the  de- 
gree to  which  his  vitality  has  been  already  undermined  by  prolonged 
hectic  fever  and  profuse  expectoration.  When  the  end  appears 
almost  in  view,  it  is  little  short  of  cruelty  to  send  such  patients  to 
die  away  from  home  and  friends.  Another  consideration  which  will 
influence  change  of  locality  is  the  recent  occurrence  of  profuse  haemop- 
tysis or  the  presence  of  albuminuria. 


490  TUBERCULOSIS. 

Sir  Andrew  Clarke^  spoke  strongly  against  sending  patients  with 
consumption  to  winter  in  Alpine  altitudes,  if  they  were  at  the  same 
time  suffering  from  albuminuria.  He  maintained  that  under  such 
circumstances  they  seldom  improved,  and  that  those  who,  while 
dwelling  in  Alpine  altitudes,  become  albuminuric  always  do  badly  ; 
and  he  accordingly  laid  down  two  important  rules  for  the  avoid- 
ance of  danger :  (1)  That  no  phthisical  patient  with  albuminous 
urine  should  be  recommended  to  winter  at  any  Alpine  height ;  (2) 
that  everyone  developing  albuminous  urine  while  dwelling  there 
should  immediately  be  sent  away.  Similarly,  high  altitudes  are 
contraindicated  for  patients  with  weak  circulation  as  well  as  for 
those  with  large,  well-marked  cavities  in  the  lungs. 

From  what  has  been  already  said  it  will  be  evident,  however,  that 
although  under  these  circumstances  it  is  advisable  for  patients  to 
remain  at  home  or  near  home,  it  is  unnecessary  for  them  to  ignore 
the  importance  of  the  open-air  treatment  of  tuberculosis,  since  ex- 
perience is  showing  that  when  patients  are  kept  out  of  doors  in  the 
fresh  air  for  a  large  part  of  the  day  all  their  symptoms  may  im- 
prove very  materially,  and  in  many  parts  of  this  country  establish- 
ments are  springing  up  where  the  open-air  treatment  of  consump- 
tion is  raised  almost  to  the  level  of  a  fine  art.  Mild  or  incipient 
cases  of  tuberculosis  may  do  well  to  winter  at  southern  resorts,  while 
severe  cases  may  improve  very  materially  by  judicious  open-air 
treatment  at  home. 

The  three  factors  in  the  climatic  treatment  of  tuberculosis  have 
been  admirably  summed  by  Osier  : 

1.  A  pure  atmosphere. 

2.  An  equable  temperature. 

3.  A  maximum  amount  of  sunshine. 

Wherever  these  three  requirements  can  be  satisfied  the  place  is 
suitable  for  a  health  resort.  With  regard  to  purity,  it  has  been  well 
pointed  out  that  the  purity  of  the  atmosphere  is  greatest  in  parts 
remote  from  large  centres  of  industry,  and  on  this  account  patients 
have  frequently  been  sent  into  the  mountains  or  into  parts  sur- 
rounded by  forests. 

In  the  Alpine  health  resorts  these  conditions  are  joined  with  the 
advantage  of  stillness  of  the  atmosphere  and  a  low  barometric 
pressure,  and  in  spite  of  the  snow  the  atmosphere  is  dry,  and,  as  a 

^  Lancet,  January  5,  1889,  vol.  i. 


TUBERCULOSIS.  491 

rule,  free  from  fog  and  cloud.  The  stillness  of  the  air  renders  the 
cold  less  perceptible  to  those  who  are  sufficiently  strong  to  take 
exercise,  and  for  them  in  most  of  the  Alpine  health  resorts  abundant 
opportunities  for  out-door  exercise  are  provided  in  skating,  tobog- 
anning,  and  in  excursions.  The  chief  Alpine  stations  that  are  at 
present  open  during  the  winter  are  the  following  :  Davos  Platz, 
Maloja,  Andermatt,  Leysen,  L'Aigle,  Samaden,  St.  Moritz,  Campfer, 
Wiesen,  Arosa.  From  personal  acquaintance  with  the  majority  of 
these  health  resorts  I  can  speak  in  high  terms  of  the  treatment 
carried  on  at  Arosa,  near  Davos,  which  as  yet  has  the  advantage  of 
being  less  crowded  than  the  latter  place.  The  altitudes  of  the  above 
range  between  4700  feet  in  the  case  of  Leysin  and  6032  feet  at  St. 
Moritz.  The  class  of  cases  suitable  for  these  altitudes  includes  those 
in  which  the  disease  is  commencing,  or  is  comparatively  stationary 
and  not  too  far  advanced,  and,  as  a  rule,  limited  to  one  lung.  When 
there  is  reason  to  believe  that  slight  hemorrhage  occurring  during 
the  summer  months  while  the  patient  is  at  low  altitudes  is  dependent 
upon  tubercular  changes,  an  Alpine  climate  may  be  of  great  service. 
When  there  is  greater  tendency  to  hemorrhage,  this  tendency  is  likely 
to  be  increased,  and  thus  may  lead  to  the  rapid  extension  of  the  dis- 
ease, with  possibly  a  fatal  issue. 

When  the  physical  signs  indicate  that  the  disease  is  far  advanced 
or  that  it  is  rapidly  developing,  especially  if  there  is  much  pyrexia 
and  loss  of  weight,  the  case  is  not  suitable  for  these  high  altitudes. 
Sir  Anthony  Clark's  opinion  of  the  dangers  of  albuminuria  has 
aleady  been  mentioned,  and  another  danger  lies  in  the  weakness 
which  may  follow  the  inability  to  sleep  at  these  elevations.  Many 
persons  know  from  experience  during  previous  visits  to  Switzerland 
that  both  their  power  of  sleep  and  their  appetite  fail  at  great  alti- 
tudes. Under  such  circumstances  other  health  resorts  should  be 
sought,  and  indeed  the  selection  in  every  case  must  be  dependent 
upon  due  consideration  of  numerous  conditions ;  for  example,  not 
only  must  the  stage  of  the  disease  be  considered,  but  it  is  necessary 
to  take  into  account  the  existence  of  special  symptoms  or  complica- 
tions, and  even  if  these  permit  resort  to  an  Alpine  climate,  the  posi- 
tion in  life  and  the  tastes  of  the  individual  should  also  be  consulted. 
The  age  of  the  individual  must  likewise  be  considered  ;  young  adults 
will  do  well  as  compared  with  those  who  are  older  and  weaker.  The 
latter,  however,  will  often  gain  more  permanent  benefit  from  a  winter 
or  two  spent  in  Australia  or  in  South  Africa ;  but  the  conditions  in 


492  TUBERCULOSIS. 

both  of  these  countries  have  to  be  carefally  chosen,  to  avoid  the  wet 
season  in  the  neighborhood  of  Cape  Town  and  to  permit  a  maximum 
of  benefit  with  a  minimum  of  discomfort.  Those  who  travel  up 
country  from  Cape  Town  must  be  prepared  for  a  somewhat  rough 
life  and  for  a  comparatively  limited  dietary.  This  climate  is  natu- 
rally suitable  for  those  with  incipient  phthisis,  with  but  few  physical 
signs  and  little  deterioration  of  general  health.  The  same  limita- 
tions apply  to  the  advantages  sometimes  sought  on  a  sea  voyage. 
A  long  sea  voyage  on  a  well-provisioned  ship  will  often  be  most 
beneficial  to  those  in  comparatively  good  health,  while  its  discomforts 
may  often  prove  disastrous  to  those  who  are  already  showing  signs 
of  much  affection  of  the  lung,  and  who»  suffer  with  much  hectic 
fever  or  with  profuse  perspiration.  ISTot withstanding  the  undoubted 
advantages  so  often  derived  from  Alpine  resorts,  the  depressing  in- 
fluence of  association  with  a  number  of  sick  people  and  the  frequent 
discussion  of  symptoms  serve  to  render  the  Alpine  health  resort 
somewhat  depressing,  especially  to  those  who  have  much  expecto- 
ration or  who  are  much  weakened  by  the  disease.  On  this  account 
efforts  are  constantly  being  made  to  discover  new  centres  with  desir- 
able conditions,  and  incipient  cases  are  sometimes  sent  to  the  Rocky 
Mountains,  to  Denver,  or  to  Colorado  Springs,  or  other  Colorado 
resorts,  where  opportunities  for  occupation  are  perhaps  greater  than 
in  the  Alpine  health  resorts.  For  the  above  reasons,  also,  efforts 
have  been  made  recently  to  develop  some  other  places  in  Switzer- 
land as  winter  stations,  and  many  people  now  go  to  St.  Beatenberg, 
to  Les  Avants  near  Montreux,  to  Grin  del  wald,  and  to  Chamo- 
nix  during  the  winter  months.  The  last-named  are  now  favorite 
resorts,  not  so  much  for  those  with  phthisical  tendencies  as  for  others 
who  may  be  suffering  from  overwork,  and  who  desire  a  short  winter 
holiday  where  much  exercise  can  be  taken.  At  Grindelwald  the  Bar 
Hotel  is  open  during  the  winter,  and  there  is  an  excellent  skating 
rink,  which  is  largely  patronized.  Grindelwald,  however,  is  now 
becoming  almost  too  popular  and  too  busy  to  be  a  satisfactory  winter 
station  for  invalids. 

For  more  advanced  cases  of  phthisis,  residence  in  one  of  the 
southern  health  resorts  is  often  preferable  to  mountain  air.  When 
the  lungs  are  much  affected,  when  there  is  much  haemoptysis,  ex- 
pectoration, or  recurrent  fever — conditions  which  render  the  Alpine 
climate  unsuitable — the  selection  will  lie  between  Cannes,  Hyeres, 
Arcachon,  and  other  resorts  on  the  French  and  Italian  Riviera,  and 


TUBERCULOSIS.  493 

places  further  afield,  such  as  Tangier,  Algiers,  or  Egypt.  A  trip 
in  Egypt  is,  however,  somewhat  costly,  more  particularly  if  the 
patient  desires  to  go  up  the  Nile  in  a  dahabeeah.  It  is  inexpedient 
for  phthisical  patients  to  attempt  to  winter  in  Cairo,  on  account  of 
the  dust,  the  noise,  and  the  overcrowding.  Those  of  limited  means 
are  sometimes  tempted  to  make  the  trip  up  the  Nile  in  the  ordinary 
tourist  steamers ;  but  the  expeditions  often  undertaken  by  tourists 
are  frequently  of  a  fatiguing  and  exciting  nature,  and  should  not  be 
risked  by  any  invalid  with  a  tendency  to  hemorrhage.  The  life  on 
a  Nile  steamer  is  otherwise  well  calculated  to  cheer  and  improve 
the  condition  of  phthisical  patients,  though  a  good  deal  necessarily 
depends  upon  the  companions  and  upon  the  boat.  So  far  as  the 
climate  is  concerned,  from  November  to  early  in  March  it  is  well 
adapted  for  cases  of  phthisis,  provided,  however,  that  precautions 
are  taken  to  avoid  chill  soon  after  sundown,  when  the  temperature 
falls  very  rapidly. 

From  personal  experience  I  can  speak  in  favorable  terms  of  the 
hotels  at  Luxor,  where  there  is  very  much  to  interest,  Avithout  undue 
fatigue.  Similar  establishments  are  to  be  found  at  Assouan,  at 
Assiout,  and  at  Mena,  close  to  the  great  pyramids.  At  Helouan, 
which  is  sometimes  recommended,  the  climate,  conditions,  and  the 
baths  are  more  suitable  for  the  treatment  of  chronic  rheumatic  and 
gouty  affections  than  for  the  reception  of  phthisical  patients.  Those 
with  archseological  tastes  and  with  comparative  affluence  will,  how- 
ever, find  that  life  on  a  dahabeeah  is  preferable  to  life  on  any  of  the 
steamers  or  in  any  of  the  hotels  ;  but  it  must  be  remembered  that, 
though  the  journey  is  undertaken  for  health,  considerations  of  time 
and  expense  cannot  always  be  lightly  put  aside. 

It  was  at  one  time  the  fashion  for  patients  to  go  to  Madeira  ;  but, 
in  spite  of  its  beauty,  the  climate  is  apt  to  be  somewhat  depressing, 
owing  to  the  damp  and  wet.  When  there  is  much  bronchial  catarrh, 
however,  the  moist  atmosphere  may  be  beneficial.  Teneriffe  among 
the  Canaries,  and  in  particular  Orotava,  present  similar  beauty  of 
scenery,  the  climate  is  more  dry,  and  the  daily  range  of  temperature 
is  less  at  Orotava  than  at  Funchal  in  Madeira.  There  are  many 
residences  at  varying  altitudes  above  sea  level,  so  that  all  tastes  can 
probably  be  suited.  During  some  part  of  the  year,  however,  there 
is  a  strong  north  wind  in  Orotava,  which  is  extremely  trying  to 
those  who  are  old  and  weak  or  who  have  a  feeble  circulation. 
Without  a  doubt,  the  popularity  of  Orotava  would  be  largely  in- 


494  TUBERCULOSIS. 

creased,  as  a  health  resort,  by  the  erection  of  shelters  similar  to 
those  now  so  commonly  employed  for  the  open-air  treatment  of 
phthisis. 

The  value  of  the  health  resorts  of  America  should  not  be  over- 
looked, such  as  San  Diego,  Los  Angeles,  Thomasville,  and  Lake- 
wood,  when  low  altitudes  are  required,  or  Colorado,  Adirondacks, 
and  Asheville,  when  high  altitudes  are  desirable- 
Whatever  climate  is  selected,  strong  injunctions  must  be  given 
against  remaining  in-doors,  and  against  leading  a  life  of  inactivity ^ 
so  long  as  the  temperature  is  fairly  stationary.  Whenever  the  tem- 
perature is  raised,  or  even  when  there  is  much  daily  oscillation, 
advantage  is  still  to  be  derived  from  the  open  air  rather  than  from 
closed  windows  and  heated  rooms.  The  recognition  of  these  con- 
siderations induced  Dr.  Burton  Fanning  to  endeavor  to  reproduce 
in  England  some  of  the  advantages  ordinarily  attributed  to  foreign 
health  resorts.  He  indicated  his  view  that,  although  the  weight  of 
opinion  generally  was  in  favor  of  elevated  sanatoria,  equally  favor- 
able results  have  been  produced  by  the  most  diverse  climates,  and 
he  concluded  that  the  only  essential  requisites  for  the  climate  of 
phthisis  are  :  that  its  air  be  pure  and  bracing,  and  that  it  allow  the 
patient  to  spend  the  greater  part  of  the  day  out  of  doors.  In  the 
valuable  series  of  papers  in  the  Lancet  (March  5,  12,  26,  1898)  he 
considers  the  open-air  treatment  in  England.  From  an  examina- 
tion of  the  practice  pursued  at  foreign  health  resorts  he  shows  that 
while  exercise  is  recommended  at  some  stations,  and  graduated 
walks  and  ascents  are  made  use  of,  yet  that  at  Falkenstein  the  in- 
mates are  kept  perpetually  at  rest,  and  that  the  long  adoption  of 
the  recumbent  position  is  thought  to  be  almost  as  important  as  the 
open  air.  He  thinks  that  the  essential  point  in  the  conduct  of  the 
various  sanatoria  lies  in  the  discipline  and  medical  supervision  that 
are  exercised,  and  that  the  results  achieved  have  but  little  to  do 
with  the  localities  so  long  as  the  open-air  treatment  is  carried  out. 

In  the  article  referred  to  a  description  is  given  of  a  sanatorium  at 
Cromer,  where  a  veranda  and  a  summer  house  were  conveniently 
situated,  and  where  a  shelter  was  erected  in  the  grounds,  with  two 
movable  sides,  consisting  of  panels  of  wood  and  glass.  These  were 
arranged  in  position  daily,  after  the  direction  of  the  wind  had  been 
observed.  Patients  are  placed  in  these  shelters  in  the  early  morn- 
ing, and  remain  there  until  sunset,  while  in  dry  weather  they  may 
stay  out  of  doors  until  much  later.     They  are  warmly  clad,  and,  if 


TUBERCULOSIS.  495 

necessary,  hot-water  bottles  are  employed  to  keep  the  feet  warm. 
Dr.  Burton  Fanning  prefers  absolute  rest  whenever  there  is  any 
perceptible  weakness  of  the  pulse,  and  he  does  not  think  that  an 
evening  rise  of  temperature,  so  long  as  it  is  below  102°  F.,  is  any 
contraindication  to  following  the  treatment  in  its  entirety.  He  has 
found,  so  far,  that  a  week  or  a  fortnight  is  sufficient  to  produce 
acclimatization,  and  that  the  time  of  greatest  anxiety  is  during  the 
first  week  or  two. 

One  of  the  most  notable  features  resulting  from  the  open-air 
treatment  is  the  gradual  fall  of  temperature  to  more  nearly  the 
normal  range.  It  was  found  that  those  patients  whose  tempera- 
tures did  not  fall  below  about  99.6°  F.  in  the  morning  were  not 
suited  to  strict  open-air  treatment.  It  was  also  noted  that  more 
improvement  in  the  temperature  was  effected  in  the  cooler  months 
than  in  the  summer.  Another  great  improvement  was  the  diminu- 
tion in  the  night-sweats  which  often  preceded  the  fall  of  the  evening 
temperature.  An  increasing  appetite  was  constantly  noted  within 
the  first  few  days  of  commencing  the  out-door  life ;  but,  on  the  other 
hand,  during  the  first  few  weeks  there  was  often  some  increase  of 
cough  and  increased  difficulty  with  expectoration. 

During  the  early  days  of  the  employment  of  the  open-air  treat- 
ment no  routine  use  of  drugs  was  made,  though  the  special  symp- 
toms and  intercurrent  ailments  were  treated  immediately.  An  ordi- 
nary linctus  was  given  to  relieve  cough  and  to  help  sleep,  and  simple 
purgatives  and  digestives  were  occasionally  employed.  Only  two 
points  of  routine  were  carried  out,  which  indeed  are  essentials 
wherever  phthisis  is  treated,  the  first  being  the  collection  and  dis- 
posal of  the  sputum,  and  the  second  a  somewhat  generous  though 
simple  dietary. 

The  results  recorded  in  the  papers  on  this  subject  are  in  strict 
accordance  with  experience  of  cases  of  phthisis  treated  in  hospitals 
in  large  cities.  Every  physician  must  have  noted  the  improvement 
which  so  often  occurs  after  a  patient  who  appeared  to  be  desperately 
ill  has  been  admitted  to  the  hospital,  where  the  conditions  of  ven- 
tilation, of  warmth,  and  of  comfort,  as  well  as  the  absence  of  over- 
crowding, have  almost  invariably  served  to  prolong  life  and  to 
diminish  the  urgency  of  the  symptoms.  It  is  not  claimed  for  the 
open-air  treatment  that  it  is  an  infallible  cure,  or  that  it  will  serve 
to  prevent  the  extension  of  tubercle  to  other  organs,  but  it  is  asserted, 
and  apparently  with  justice,  that  in  a  large  percentage  of  patients 


496  TUBERCULOSIS. 

improvement  will  follow  the  adoption  of  this  system ;  and  there 
seems  to  be  but  little  reason  why  establishments  for  the  open-air 
treatment  of  phthisis  should  not  become  part  of  the  health  arrange- 
ments of  every  town. 

During  the  early  stages  of  tuberculosis,  when  the  evening  tem- 
perature is  nearly  normal  and  when  there  have  been  no  indications 
of  hsemoptysis,  abundant  exercise  should  be  encouraged,  and  the 
particular  form  of  exercise  should  necessitate  free  movement  in  the 
open  air.  Although,  in  general  terms,  exercise  is  beneficial  in  pro- 
moting appetite  and  in  increasing  the  breathing  power,  it  is  very 
desirable  to  avoid  any  form  of  athleticism  which  entails  any  sudden 
severe  strain.  The  object  of  encouraging  the  patient  to  take  an  in- 
creasing amount  of  exercise  is  to  throw  into  activity  the  healthy 
parts  of  the  lungs,  which  are  scarcely  perhaps  utilized  during  the 
time  that  a  sedentary  life  is  indulged  in.  It  has  even  been  recom- 
mended that  by  forced  efforts  at  respiration,  as,  for  example,  by 
bugle  blowing,  the  healthy  portions  of  the  lungs  should  be  rendered 
emphysematous ;  but  although  the  size  of  the  thorax  will  in  this 
way  be  increased,  there  can  be  little  advantage  in  producing  em- 
physema intentionally,  since  when  this  disease  is  present  the  breath- 
ing power  is  impaired,  notwithstanding  the  increased  size  of  the 
thorax. 

For  mild  cases  skating  and  tobogganing  are  sometimes  beneficial, 
and  can  be  indulged  in  when  the  patient  is  in  mountain  air  in  the 
winter ;  they  encourage  circulation  and  respiration,  besides  affording 
occupation  of  a  cheerful  nature.  It  cannot  be  too  often  impressed 
upon  the  patient  and  his  friends  that  a  sedentary,  brooding  life  is 
one  which  is  most  likely  to  hasten  the  tubercular  process.  Even 
when  on  a  long  sea  voyage,  the  rule  of  an  abundance  of  daily  exer- 
cise should  be  observed  unless  there  is  reason  to  fear  haemoptysis. 
It  is  generally  better  to  distribute  the  exercise  over  the  whole  day 
instead  of  crowding  it  all  into  a  limited  period. 

Even  for  patients  who  are  too  severely  ill  to  be  sent  to  a  health 
resort,  the  appetite  and  the  general  nutrition  are  improved  after 
being  out  in  a  sailing  boat,  in  a  carriage,  or  even  in  a  bath  chair. 
The  influence  of  change  of  surroundings  and  fresh  air  combine 
under  these  circumstances  to  work  for  good. 

The  clothing  of  the  consumptive  deserves  attention,  since,  misled 
by  the  frequency  of  cough  aad  expectoration,  many  consumptives 
are  in  the  habit  of  overclothing  themselves.     The  clothing  should 


TUBERCULOSIS.  497 

be  warm  and  light,  and,  although  flannel  should  be  worn  next  the 
skin,  it  should  be  frequently  changed,  a  proceeding  which  involves 
no  risk,  provided  that  the  fresh  garment  is  properly  aired.  It  is,  of 
course,  essential  that  warm  woollen  gloves  should  be  worn  in  cold 
climates,  and  that  the  feet  should  be  kept  warm  with  woollen  socks 
and  with  thick  boots,  since  risk  of  bronchitis  or  of  hemorrhage 
appears  to  be  somewhat  greater  when  the  extremities  are  allowed  to 
get  cold.  When  pursuing  the  open-air  treatment  in  this  country, 
care  should  be  taken  that  the  patients  when  lying  on  their  couches 
are  warmly  clad  and  covered  with  warm,  light  rugs  to  prevent  the 
rapid  cooling  of  the  body  with  any  alteration  of  temperature ;  but, 
on  the  other  hand,  overclothing  which  promotes  free  perspiration  is 
only  too  likely  to  favor  risks  of  chill.  Those  who  are  able  to  take 
exercise  should  have  at  hand  some  additional  light,  warm,  woollen 
wrap  to  put  on  when  resting. 

The  diet  of  phthisical  patients  presents  many  difficulties,  the  chief 
being  the  distaste  for  many  important  articles  of  food.  With  regard 
to  quantity,  it  is  difficult  to  lay  down  any  rule ;  as  much  nourishing 
food  should  be  taken  as  can  be  digested,  the  amount  and  the  nature 
of  the  food  being  varied  in  accordance  with  any  dyspepsia  that  may 
arise.  So  long  as  the  temperature  is  normal,  or  nearly  normal,  all 
kinds  of  diet  may  be  employed,  but  it  is  generally  considered  advis- 
able that  fats  should  be  taken  in  abundance  to  counteract  the  wasting 
process  incidental  to  the  disease.  When  the  patient  is  unable  to  take 
much  meat,  fats  may  be  taken  in  the  form  of  milk  or  butter.  When 
the  temperature  is  much  above  the  normal,  the  diet  must  be  some- 
what modified,  and  should  consist  more  purely  of  liquids  ;  but 
even  then  milk,  eggs,  and  butter  should  form  the  staple  article  of 
food,  and  in  extreme  cases  patients  may  even  live,  like  those  with 
acute  nephritis,  on  an  exclusive  milk  diet.  If  restricted  to  a  milk 
diet,  it  should  be  given  in  repeated  small  quantities.  When  milk 
disagrees,  koumyss  or  buttermilk  may  be  substituted.  Whitla 
recommends  the  following  recipe  as  the  simplest  and  best  of  all 
plans  for  the  production  of  artificial  koumyss. 

"  In  the  absence  of  yeast,  a  palatable  and  highly  nutritious  bever- 
age may  be  prepared  by  mixing  one  part  of  fresh,  rich  buttermilk 
and  one  part  of  water  with  eight  parts  of  cow's  milk,  adding  a  very 
little  loaf  sugar,  putting  the  mixture  into  a  loosely  corked  gallon 
jar,  leaving  it  in  a  warm,  but  not  hot,  place  beside  the  fire,  where 
it  may  be  frequently  and  briskly  shaken,  and  in  thirty-six  to  forty- 

32 


498  TUBERCULOSIS. 

eight  hours  it  is  ready  for  use  as  a  pleasant,  sharp-tasted,  thick 
liquid,  which  slightly  effervesces  Some  little  skill  and  experience 
are  required  in  producing  a  uniform  result,  and  the  patient  should  not 
give  it  up  if  the  first  and  second  results  are  unsatisfactory.  After 
the  first  batch  of  this  artificial  koumyss  has  been  successfully  pre- 
pared, the  use  of  buttermilk  may  be  entirely  dispensed  with,  as  an 
equal  bulk  of  the  koumyss  liquid  can  be  used  instead  in  the  prepa- 
ration of  each  subsequent  quantity.  Some  patients  succeed  best  by 
leaving  out  the  sugar  entirely,  and  by  shaking  the  mixture  very 
seldom  during  the  first  twenty-four  hours.  It  may  be  taken  ad  lib. 
The  buttermilk  referred  to  above  is  that  obtained  in  the  process 
where  the  cream  and  milk  have  been  both  churned  together  in  the 
manufacture  of  butter."'  Koumyss  may,  however,  now  be  procured 
from  most  of  the  large  dairy  companies. 

When  cow's  milk  disagrees,  it  is  sometimes  found  that  the  milk 
from  other  animals,  notably  the  ass,  the  mare,  or  the  goat,  may  be 
taken,  but  it  is  well  never  to  force  patients  to  struggle  with  these 
against  a  strong  disinclination.  As  in  infant  feeding,  milk  may 
sometimes  be  peptonized  before  its  administration,  and  numerous 
peptonizing  powders  are  supplied  by  chemists  for  this  purpose. 

It  has  been  found  that  when  the  administration  of  food  promotes 
coughing,  nourishment  may  be  given  through  a  soft  oesophageal 
tube,  and  by  this  means  Debove  introduced  the  system  of  overfeed- 
ing, or  "  sur  alimentation,"  for  which  excellent  results  have  been 
claimed.  Food  administered  in  this  way  must  necessarily  be  in 
the  liquid  form,  and  it  may  consist  mainly  of  milk,  to  which  dry, 
powdered  meat  has  been  added. 

Occasionally,  when  the  digestive  system  rebels  against  the  admin- 
istration of  milk  or  of  meat,  nourishment  may  be  maintained  by 
giving  oysters,  fish,  or  game,  on  alternate  days. 

The  employment  of  alcohol  in  tuberculosis  has  led  to  much  dis- 
cussion. In  the  early  stages  it  is  undoubtedly  not  required,  while 
in  the  later  stages  it  may  promote  coughing. 

When  wasting  is  progressing  rapidly,  alcohol  is  sometimes  bene- 
ficial if  given  with  meals.  When  patients  complain  of  sleeplessness, 
or  when  they  are  frequently  disturbed  by  coughing  during  the  night, 
a  small  amount  of  stimulant  taken  at  bedtime  with  some  form  of 
nourishment,  such  as  milk,  arrow-root,  or  beef-tea,  may  serve  to 

^  Pharmacy,  Materia  Medica,  and  Therapeutics,  p.  566. 


TUBERCULOSIS.  499 

insure  a  quiet  night.  It  has  been  recommended  that  in  advanced 
stages  of  consumption  stimulants  should  be  given  in  abundance, 
and  it  has  been  claimed  for  this  treatment  that  the  frequency  of 
diarrhoea  is  diminished,  sleep  is  induced,  and  waste  retarded.  There 
are,  however,  grave  objections  to  the  lavish  employment  of  stimulants, 
and  it  is  better  to  reserve  them  for  occasional  use  on  emergencies. 

While  speaking  of  the  dietary  of  phthisical  subjects,  it  will  be 
perhaps  convenient  to  mention  the  inadvisability  of  employing  sweet 
syrups  in  the  medicines,  since  these  may  promote  much  dyspepsia, 
and  thus  interfere  with  digestion.  A  similar  result  may  follow 
occasionally  from  the  administration  of  cod-liver  oil,  of  guaiacol, 
creosote,  and  hypophosphites,  and  when  employing  these  remedies 
the  digestion  must  always  be  carefully  watched,  since  it  is  obvious 
that  remedies  which  interfere  with  digestion  will,  by  diminishing 
the  nutrition  of  the  individual,  outweigh  any  advantages  with  which 
they  otherwise  might  be  credited. 

Many  of  the  foregoing  principles  connected  with  exercise,  open 
air,  and  diet  have  been  combined  in  varying  degrees  in  different 
localities.  Much  has  recently  been  written  concerning  the  Nordrach 
treatment  of  consumption,  of  which  an  important  element  consists 
in  the  endeavor  to  increase  the  weight  and  well-being  of  the  patient 
by  a  somewhat  liberal  form  of  diet.  Thus,  for  example,  it  is  recom- 
mended that  as  much  as  possible  of  the  following  or  such-like  foods 
should  be  eaten  : 

Breakfast,  8  a.m.  Tea  or  coffee,  cold  tongue,  ham,  fowl,  or  sau- 
sage, bread  and  butter  (with  plenty  of  the  latter),  and  one  pint  of 
milk. 

Dinner  at  1  p.m.  First  course  :  fish,  fowl,  or  meat.  Second 
course  :  fowl  or  meat.  With  both  courses  a  liberal  supply  of  pota- 
toes, vegetables,  and  gravy  or  sauce,  with  butter  as  the  main  ingre- 
dient. Third  course  :  fruit,  with  biscuits,  nuts,  etc. — say,  three 
times  weekly,  the  other  days  pastry,  milk  puddings,  ices,  etc. — 
coffee  and  one  pint  of  milk. 

Supper  at  7  p.m.  One  hot  course,  as  at  dinner,  potatoes  and  vege- 
tables included,  and  one  cold  course,  ns  at  breakfast,  with  bread, 
butter,  and  tea,  and  one  pint  of  milk. 

To  enable  the  digestive  functions  to  be  properly  performed,  it  is 
recommended,  first,  that  as  much  as  possible  should  be  eaten  at 
meals,  and  that  nothing  should  be  taken  between  whiles.  Secondly, 
that  there  should  be  a  long  interval  of  rest  between  the  meals,  to 


500  TUBERCULOSIS. 

allow  complete  assimilation.  Thirdly,  that  before  dinner  and  sup- 
per the  patient  should  spend  an  hour  reclinmg  upon  a  sofa  or  in  a 
hammock,  on  the  theory  that  a  meal  is  more  likely  to  be  digested  if 
the  body  is  not  fatigued.  At  Nordrach  the  amount  of  exercise  taken 
is  regulated  by  the  temperature  of  the  body,  the  temperature  being 
taken  on  waking  in  the  morning,  then  after  the  morning  walk  (at 
11.30),  again  after  the  afternoon  walk  (at  5.30),  and  at  night  ten 
minutes  before  retiring  to  bed  (at  9  or  9.30).  Should  the  tempera- 
ture for  a  week  be  regularly  below  98.6°  F.  in  the  morning  and 
below  100.4°  F.  in  the  evening  after  rest,  gentle  walking  exercise 
may  be  taken ;  but  when  the  temperature  exceeds  these  limits  abso- 
lute rest  in  bed  is  recommended,  and  even  talking  is  forbidden. 
When  immediately  after  exercise  the  temperature  is  above  100.4°  F., 
it  is  assumed  that  the  walk  has  been  too  long,  and  rest  for  the  re- 
mainder of  the  day  is  enjoined.  Even  when  at  rest  with  fever,  it 
is  recommended  that  the  same  quantity  of  food  is  to  be  taken  by 
the  patient  as  when  he  is  about,  and  it  is  asserted  that  the  more  food 
is  taken  the  sooner  the  fever  will  subside. 

With  regard  to  the  value  of  fresh  air,  the  Nordrach  treatment 
coincides  with  that  already  mentioned.  The  windows  are  to  be 
opened  to  their  fullest  extent  both  day  and  night,  an  abundance  of 
clothing  is  recommended  when  the  patient  is  at  rest,  but  during  ex- 
ercise it  is  advised  that  he  should  have  as  little  clothing  as  possible, 
since  the  less  weight  he  has  to  carry  the  better. 

It  is  admitted  that  there  is  no  need  for  a  sanatorium  of  any  special 
construction,  provided  that  the  locality  where  the  treatment  is  pur- 
sued is  in  the  country,  where  pure  air  is  to  be  had,  well  away  from 
smoke,  dust,  traffic,  and  excitement,  where  a  quiet,  unconventional 
life  may  be  led.  But,  apart  from  these  factors,  it  is  recommended 
that  each  patient's  room  should  be  about  14  feet  by  14  feet  by  12 
feet,  with  the  front  almost  entirely  occupied  with  window  space, 
and  that  the  floors  should  be  covered  with  linoleum,  the  walls  and 
ceilings  sheeted  with  well-varnished  wood,  all  of  which  can  be 
washed  as  often  as  necessary.  Some  stress  is  laid  upon  the  use  of 
steam  coils  or  hot-water  pipes,  and  of  electric  light,  so  as  to  avoid 
the  vitiation  of  the  atmosphere  by  fire  or  by  gas,  while  in  sanatoria 
intended  for  the  reception  of  numerous  patients  the  dining-hall 
should  be  a  large  room  with  many  windows.  Common  sitting- 
rooms  or  meeting-rooms  are  to  be  avoided,  since  they  are  considered 
conducive  to  loitering,  talking,  and  excitement. 


TUBERCULOSIS.  501 

Turning  next  to  the  use  of  medicinal  remedies,  one  of  the  most 
time-honored  drugs  employed  in  the  treatment  of  consumption 
merits  the  first  place,  even  though  it  is  somewhat  questionable 
whether  it  acts  as  a  drug  or  as  a  food.  The  administration  of  cod- 
liver  oil  is  almost  a  matter  of  routine  in  cases  of  phthisis  ;  and 
although  at  first  it  may  cause  some  discomfort,  yet  a  little  manage- 
ment will  often  enable  increasing  quantities  to  be  taken.  It  is  best, 
when  giving  cod-liver  oil,  to  commence  with  the  small  dose  of  a 
teaspoonful,  and  this  will  perhaps  produce  least  discomfort  if  given 
about  two  hours  after  meals  or  shortly  before  going  to  bed.  It  is  only 
during  the  first  weeks  of  its  administration  that  it  is  likely  to  cause 
much  nausea,  and  it  is  perhaps  questionable  whether  the  nausea  is 
not  sometimes  prompted  by  a  preconceived  distaste  for  the  remedy 
rather  than  by  the  actual  eructation  which  it  causes.  It  is  certainly, 
as  a  rule,  more  easily  absorbed  than  any  other  form  of  oil  or  fat, 
and  its  physical  properties,  althought  at  first  repellant,  can,  as  a 
rule,  with  care  and  discretion  be  soon  tolerated.  Very  often  cod- 
liver  oil  is  less  objectionable  if  the  mouth  is  first  thoroughly  wetted 
with  water  or  weak  coffee,  and  if  a  small  quantity  of  the  same  liquid 
is  swallowed  subsequently.  Occasionally,  especially  with  children,  a 
little  salt  taken  with  the  oil,  or  a  piece  of  bread  eaten  afterward,  will 
tend  to  remove  the  taste  and  to  cleanse  the  mouth.  When  once  the 
distaste  has  been  overcome,  the  amount  given  can  be  speedily  in- 
creased until  it  amounts  to  half  an  ounce  or  more  after  each  meal. 

Numerous  substitutes  for  cod-liver  oil  have  been  introduced,  and 
many  emulsions  and  similar  compounds  have  been  devised  to  over- 
come the  difficulty  of  its  administration  ;  but  I  am  convinced  that 
in  the  large  majority  of  cases  the  simple  form  of  oil  is  more  easily 
tolerated  than  any  of  these  preparations.  When  the  digestion  is 
weak  and  cod-liver  oil  creates  some  slight  nausea,  it  may  be  given 
in  combination  with  extract  of  malt,  which  also  to  a  large  extent 
acts  as  a  food  and  serves  to  mask  the  taste  of  the  oil.  In  cases  of 
extreme  wasting  among  young  children,  especially  if  associated  with 
much  diarrhoea,  the  oil  may  be  employed  by  inunction,  and  I  have 
seen  numerous  cases  in  which  this  device  has  been  followed  by 
great  improvement  in  weight  and  in  strength.  This  treatment  is, 
however,  somewhat  difficult  for  adults. 

There  are  certain  conditions  in  which  it  is  inexpedient  to  persist 
in  the  employment  of  cod-liver  oil ;  foremost  among  these  should 
be  mentioned  any  tendency  to  diarrhoea.     In  the  treatment  of  chil- 


502  TUBERCULOSIS. 

dren  with  tuberculosis,  an  increase  in  diarrhoea  is  often  found  to  be 
arrested  when  the  administration  of  cod-liver  oil  is  checked,  and 
indeed  there  seems  some  probability  that  this  symptom  may  even 
be  induced  by  the  use  of  the  oil  in  overdoses.  Independently  of 
diarrhoea,  the  employment  of  cod-liver  oil  is  generally  contraindi- 
cated  by  a  high  temperature,  especially  when  the  morning  tempera- 
ture is  above  the  normal  level,  since,  under  these  circumstances,  the 
oil  is  very  prone  to  promote  dyspeptic  symptoms. 

Occupying  a  position  comparable  to  that  of  cod-liver  oil — that  is 
to  say,  as  acting  almost  as  foods  rather  than  as  medicines — may  be 
classed  the  various  proprietary  preparations  of  malt  which  are  often 
given  alone,  and  coming  into  close  range  with  these  stand  the  forms 
of  pancreatic  emulsions  which  are  intended  to  facilitate  the  absorp- 
tion of  milk  or  other  food  when  the  digestion  is  weak.  A  remedy 
that  has  obtained  a  great  reputation  in  the  treatment  of  the  early 
stages  of  phthisis  is  the  compound  syrup  of  the  hypophosphites. 
There  is  a  proprietary  preparation  of  this  sold  under  the  name  of 
Fellows'  Syrup,  while  a  formula  for  a  similar  preparation  has  been 
devised  containing  20  grains  of  quinine,  1  grain  of  strychnine,  2 
drachms  of  hypophosphorous  acid,  3  ounces  of  iron  hypophosphite, 
together  with  hypophosphites  of  calcium,  magnesium,  and  potas- 
sium, made  up  to  1  pint  with  syrup.  There  is  an  abundance  of 
evidence  that  during  the  administration  of  hypophosphites  phthis- 
ical patients  improve  greatly,  but  it  is  to  some  extent  doubtful  how 
far  this  improvement  is  one  of  an  increasing  general  nutrition,  or 
whether  it  is  due  to  any  specific  action  of  phosphorus  upon  the 
tubercular  process.  It  has  often  been  urged  that  during  the  admin- 
istration of  phosphorus  degenerative  changes  occur  with  greater 
rapidity,  and  it  has  been  thought  possible,  therefore,  that  phosphorus 
or  hypophosphites  might  favor  first  degeneration  and  subsequent 
calcification  of  tubercular  masses. 

Calcium  and  sodium  hypophosphites  have  also  been  strongly 
recommended  in  phthisis.  In  overdoses  they  are  said  to  produce 
weakness,  sleepiness,  headache,  giddiness,  noises  in  the  ears,  loss  of 
appetite,  colic,  and  diarrhoea,  and  they  are  even  credited  with  favor- 
ing hemorrhage  from  the  nose  and  lungs.  If  given  in  doses  of  from 
1  to  5  grains  three  times  a  day,  in  syrup  or  pill,  they  may  lead  to 
great  improvement  in  the  earlier  stages  of  phthisis  ;  the  cough  and 
expectoration  are  reduced,  while  the  appetite  and  digestion  are  also 
favorably  affected. 


TUBERCULOSIS.  503 

Of  the  forms  of  specific  treatment  of  consumption  apart  from  the 
treatment  by  Koch's  tuberculin,  which  will  be  considered  later,  the 
most  hopeful  results  have  been  obtained  with  creosote  and  with 
guaiacol.  Both  of  these  remedies  have  been  employed  on  a  large 
scale,  though  perhaps  of  recent  years  the  preference  has  been  given 
to  guaiacol  and  its  preparations.  Creosote  has  been  administered 
in  a  variety  of  ways,  and  it  is  usual  to  commence  with  moderate 
doses  of  1  to  5  minims  and  to  increase  the  amount,  watching  the 
effect  on  the  digestive  system.  It  has  been  found  possible  to  admin- 
ister as  much  as  30  to  60  minims  daily  without  any  ill  effects. 
Creosote  may  be  given  either  in  capsule  or  emulsion,  or  it  may  be 
mixed  with  some  fixed  oil,  as,  for  example,  cod-liver  oil,  almond 
oil,  or  olive  oil.  An  emulsion  of  creosote  may  be  prepared  as 
follows  : 


. — Creosoti  .         .         .         . 

Tincturse  gentianse  compositse 
Alcohol  .         .         .         . 

Extract!  glycyrrhizse  fluidi 
Aquse     .  .  .  .  . 


.     TTLxxx. 


Of  this  emulsion  an  ounce  may  be  given  three  times  daily  after 
food.     The  British  pharmacopoeial  mixture  consists  of  : 

R. — Creosoti HXxvj. 

Spiritus  juniperi     .......  TTtxvj. 

Syrupi fl|j. 

Aquse  destillatse  .         .         .         .       q.  s.  ad  fl  ^  xyj. 

The  dose  of  this  is  from  \  ounce  to  1  ounce.  Creosote  has  also 
been  given  in  a  pill  containing  1  part  of  creosote  and  1  of  curd  soap 
in  powder. 

Creosote  is  also  •  now  frequently  administered  enclosed  in  soft 
gelatinous  capsules  containing  a  variable  amount  of  the  remedy— 
for  example,  from  J  minim  to  3  minims.  It  is  often  recommended 
that  the  creosote  employed  should  be  obtained  from  beechwood-  -a 
distinction,  however,  which  is  not  made  directly  in  either  the  United 
States  or  the  British  Pharmacopoeias,  although  the  official  form  of 
creosote  is  obtained  from  the  distillation  of  wood  tar  instead  of 
coal  tar,  and  the  test  with  perchloride  of  iron  serves  to  indicate 
when  coal  tar  has  been  used  in  the  preparation  of  this  drug. 

During  the  administration  of  creosote  it  is  well  to  remember  that 
if  large  doses  are  given  they  may  lead  to  much  gastric  discomfort, 
indicated  by  pyrosis  and  sometimes  by  nausea  and  vomiting.     These 


504  TUBEBOULOSIS. 

obvious  disadvantages  have  led  to  the  substitution  of  creosote  car- 
bonate (creosotal)  and  of  guaiacol  carbonate,  which  are  less  irritant, 
and  can  accordingly  be  given  in  larger  dose ;  but  even  these  some- 
times provoke  vomiting,  and  must  then  be  discontinued.  When 
they  can  be  tolerated  they  frequently  materially  reduce  the  amount 
of  expectoration  and  render  it  less  offensive. 

For  the  present  it  will  be  convenient  to  defer  all  consideration  of 
the  employment  of  creosote  by  inhalation,  since  the  treatment  of 
phthisis  by  inhalations  being  a  particularly  important  subject,  it 
will  be  more  convenient  to  group  together  all  remedies  employed 
in  this  way. 

The  activity  of  creosote  is  believed  to  be  largely  due  to  the  guaia- 
col, which  in  good  wood  creosote  is  present  in  the  proportion  of  20 
per  cent.,  while,  according  to  Yeo,  beech  creosote  contains  from  60 
to  90  per  cent.  Guaiacol  can,  however,  be  prepared  synthetically 
from  pyrocatechin.  It  may  be  obtained  either  in  the  form  of  a 
liquid  or  in  crystals,  and  while  its  odor  resembles  that  of  creosote, 
it  is  somewhat  more  agreeable.  The  liquid  form  is  that  most  com- 
monly employed,  and  it  can  be  administered  in  doses  of  from  1  to 
5  minims.  When  given  in  solution  it  is  ordinarily  dissolved  in 
alcohol  in  the  following  proportions  : 

Guaiacol         .......  1  part. 

Water 180  parts. 

Alcohol  (90  per  cent. ) 20      " 

Of  this  solution  from  1  to  4  drachms  can  be  given  in  water  twice 
or  thrice  daily.  It  has  also  been  recommended  that  it  should  be 
given  in  cod-liver  oil,  or  in  a  mixture  consisting  of 

Guaiacol         .......  13.5  parts. 

Tincture  of  gentian        .         .         .         .         .  30         " 

Alcohol  (90  per  cent. ) 250         " 

Sherry 1000         " 

Of  this  mixture  two  teaspoonfuls  may  be  given  twice  or  thrice 
daily  in  water. 

Although  guaiacol  is  less  irritating  than  creosote,  some  patients 
find  difficulty  in  taking  it,  and  this  difficulty  extends  even  to  the 
employment  of  this  remedy  in  pills  or  capsules  ;  it  has,  accordingly, 
been  recommended  that  in  such  cases  it  should  be  administered 
hypodermatically  in  a  solution  consisting  of  5  per  cent,  of  guaiacol 
and  1  per  cent,  of  iodoform  in  sterilized  olive  oil,  a  cubic  centimetre 


TUBERCULOSIS.  505 

being  the  dose  of  this  solution.  Although  this  method  of  admin- 
istration has  been  credited  with  the  power  of  lessening  cough  and 
expectoration,  diminishing  the  number  of  bacilli  in  the  sputum,  and 
favoring  cicatrization  of  cavities,  it  has  none  the  less  the  objection 
of  occasionally  causing  much  pain,  and  the  hypodermatic  injection 
appears  to  me  to  present  no  advantage  over  the  internal  administra- 
tion. There  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  dyspeptic  symptoms,  which 
have  been  so  often  observed  with  guaiacol,  result  from  its  adminis- 
tration in  overdoses,  and  that  these  symptoms  may  be  avoided  by 
commencing  with  a  small  dose  and  by  gradually  and  cautiously 
increasing  the  dose  employed.  It  has  been  stated,  moreover,  that 
large  doses  present  no  advantages  over  small  doses,  and  that  the 
results  depend  upon  the  length  of  time  this  remedy  is  given  rather 
than  upon  the  amount  of  the  individual  dose.  It  has  also  been 
recommended  that  guaiacol  should  be  administered  in  capsules  con- 
taining 1  to  3  minims,  with  ^  grain  of  iodoform  in  each. 

As  already  stated,  guaiacol  carbonate  is  not  irritating  to  the  diges- 
tive system.  It  occurs  in  minute  white  crystals  which  are  insoluble 
in  water,  and  it  is,  therefore,  conveniently  administered  in  cachets, 
the  dose  being  from  3  to  8  grains.  Other  compounds  of  guaiacol 
which  have  been  recommended  are  the  benzoate,  4  to  14  grains  in 
cachet ;  the  valerianate,  3  minims  in  capsule  ;  guaiacetin,  8  grains  ; 
and  the  piperidin  guaiacolate,  which  may  be  employed  in  doses  of 
from  5  to  30  grains.  The  last  can  be  given  in  solution  with  chlo- 
roform water,  and  during  its  administration  the  appetite  and  general 
strength  have  been  said  to  improve,  while  no  unpleasant  effects  have 
been  observed. 

The  external  employment  of  guaiacol  also  possesses  some  interest, 
doses  of  from  30  to  60  minims  being  applied  to  the  skin  and  covered 
with  an  impermeable  covering.  Its  absorption  is  evidenced  by  a 
fall  of  temperature  with  profuse  perspiration,  but  these  symptoms 
are  speedily  followed  by  return  of  fever,  and  accompanied  by  so 
much  depression  that  this  mode  of  administration  has  been  almost 
entirely  discarded.  So  strong  has  been  the  belief  in  the  efficacy  of 
guaiacol  that  it  has  been  employed  in  almost  every  possible  way. 
It  has  been  given  in  enemata,  it  has  been  used  as  an  inunction, 
being  rubbed  into  the  skin  of  the  chest  and  abdomen,  and  it  has 
even  been  injected  into  the  lungs  directly  with  a  hypodermatic  syr- 
inge, and,  like  creosote,  it  has  been  employed  in  inhalation.  The 
benefits  which  can  be  derived  from  either  creosote  or  guaiacol  are  to 


506  TUBEBGULOSIS. 

a  great  extent  limited  by  the  stage  of  the  disease.  Both  of  these 
remedies  may  cause  some  improvement  if  used  in  the  early  stages, 
as  well  as  after  the  formation  of  cavities,  and  guaiacol  has  even 
been  credited  with  being  of  very  great  service  in  the  later  stages  of 
phthisis.  As  a  rule,  however,  these  remedies  are  used  with  the 
greatest  chance  of  success  before  symptomatic  treatment  is  urgently 
needed.  At  later  stages,  although  they  may  still  be  employed,  they 
have  frequently  to  be  associated  with  drugs  necessitated  by  the  prom- 
inence of  some  special  symptom,  such  as  cough,  diarrhoea,  or  fever. 

At  one  time  arsenic  was  largely  prescribed  in  the  treatment  of 
tuberculosis,  and  even  now  it  is  still  much  employed  by  French 
physicians.  Its  action  is  in  all  probability  similar  to  that  of  phos- 
phorus— that  is,  it  promotes  fatty  degeneration  of  the  results  of 
inflammation— but,  apart  from  this,  the  tonic  value  of  arsenic  can- 
not be  overlooked.  During  its  use  the  rapidity  of  respiration  is 
often  diminished  and  the  breathing  becomes  more  easy ;  but  these 
good  results  are  commonly  seen  independently  of  the  existence  of 
tuberculosis.  I  have  used  arsenic  fairly  largely  in  phthisis,  but  I 
have  not  been  convinced  that  the  drug  is  capable  of  controlling, 
still  less  of  arresting,  the  disease.  The  improvement,  so  far  as  my 
experience  goes,  is  often  limited  to  the  general  improvement  of  the 
patient's  condition.  The  appetite  may  increase  and  the  patient  may 
put  on  weight  for  a  time,  but  the  condition  of  the  lungs,  so  far  as 
I  have  observed,  has  not  shown  any  marked  benefit.  It  is  note- 
worthy, however,  that  arsenic  has  been  credited  with  controlling  the 
night-sweats  in  the  later  stages  of  phthisis.  On  somewhat  theoret- 
ical grounds  it  has  been  asserted  that  arsenic,  even  when  it  does  not 
affect  portions  of  the  lung  already  involved,  will  prevent  the  exten- 
sion of  the  disease  and  will  diminish  the  risks  of  catarrhal  conditions. 

Sulphur  has  been  largely  employed,  and  it  has  been  used  in 
numerous  curious  ways.  Whitla  speaks  of  the  onion  (wliich  con- 
tains much  sulphur)  as  one  of  the  best  known  expectorants  ;  sul- 
phur has  also  been  given  internally  in  the  crude  form  or  in  com- 
bination with  hydrogen  or  various  metals,  as  in  the  sulphuretted 
waters.  A  few  years  ago  strong  opinions  were  expressed  upon  the 
value  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen  when  given  by  rectal  injection. 
This  extremely  uncomfortable  method  of  treatment  has  now  been 
almost  entirely  abandoned,  although  shortly  after  its  introduction  it 
was  highly  vaunted,  and  numerous  cases  were  mentioned  in  which 
it   was   credited  with   having  effected  considerable  improvement. 


TUBERCULOSIS.  507 

Notwithstanding  the  undoubted  elimination  of  sulphur  from  the 
vessels  of  the  lungs,  there  is  no  evidence  that  it  is  given  off  by 
these  vessels  in  sufficiently  concentrated  form  to  influence  the 
growth  or  the  development  of  bacilli,  and  it  was  solely  on  these 
purely  theoretical  considerations  that  this  mode  of  treatment  was 
ever  advocated. 

Different  forms  of  mercury  have  been  given  with  a  similar  anti- 
septic object — for  example,  small  doses  of  the  corrosive  mercuric 
chloride,  or  repeated  doses  of  calomel  or  of  biniodide  of  mercury. 
It  is,  however,  extremely  doubtful  whether  these  affect  the  tuber- 
cular process,  although  during  their  administration  patients  may 
improve  somewhat  from  relief  of  diarrhoea  and  the  reduction  of 
temperature. 

Iron  is  another  remedy  for  which  much  has  been  claimed  in  the 
treatment  of  tuberculosis,  and  in  selected  cases  some  benefit  will 
often  be  found  to  result  from  its  use,  more  particularly  among  those 
who  suffer  from  much  anaemia.  In  chronic  forms  of  phthisis,  in 
particular,  great  apparent  improvement  may  be  noted  ;  but  it  will 
generally  be  found  that  there  is  no  alteration  in  the  physical  signs, 
although  there  may  be  an  increase  of  appetite  and  a  gain  of  weight 
during  the  use  of  iron  compounds.  Ferric  chloride  is  perhaps  the 
preparation  which  is  best  taken  by  phthisical  patients,  although  to 
children  or  young  adults  the  syrup  of  ferrous  iodide  is  often  given. 
There  appears  to  be  a  general  feeling  that  iron  compounds  are  con- 
traindicated  by  recent  haemoptysis,  and  also  that  they  should  not  be 
given  when  the  expectoration  is  at  all  blood-tinged.  I  am  not  aware 
that  there  is  any  direct  evidence  of  the  danger  of  employing  iron 
under  these  conditions,  and  indeed  the  astringent  preparations  of 
iron  are  frequently  beneficial  during  convalescence  from  haemoptysis. 

The  keynote  of  much  of  the  foregoing  general  treatment  of  con- 
sumption is  the  desire  to  employ  remedies  to  counteract  the  activity 
of  the  bacilli.  In  most  cases  it  is  recommended  that  these  reme- 
dies should  be  employed  internally  ;  but  it  is  obvious  that  the  anti- 
septics so  used  must  be  very  considerably  diluted  before  being  con- 
veyed from  the  bloodvessels  of  the  stomach  to  those  of  the  lungs, 
and  it  is  only  during  their  circulation  in  the  vessels  of  the  lung 
or  during  their  elimination,  that  the  antiseptic  action  can  be 
operative.  Most  of  these  antiseptics  are  of  a  volatile  nature,  and, 
therefore,  they  can  be  used  in  the  form  of  inhalations  or  sprays, 
and  it  is  often  thought  that  in  this  form  more  active  material  could 


508  TUBERCULOSIS. 

be  brought  to  bear  upon  the  affected  site.  Accordingly  patients 
with  consumption  have  been  advised  to  wear  inhalers  fitted  with 
sponge,  or  tow,  upon  which  a  volatile  antiseptic  remedy  could  be 
poured.  For  a  long  time  there  was  much  doubt  as  to  the  efficacy 
of  these  remedies.  Dr.  Latham,  in  his  Harveian  Oration,  says  that 
he  fears  the  discovery  of  the  tubercle  bacillus  has  not  proved  in  all 
respects  to  be  an  unmixed  benefit,  and  that  the  result  of  treating 
patients  in  various  ways  by  antiseptic  remedies  has  been  that  the 
patient,  and  not  the  bacillus,  has  succumbed.  It  is  at  least  certain 
that  some  of  the  antiseptics,  if  used  as  a  spray  or  inhalation,  must 
be  given  in  very  dilute  form,  since  they  would  otherwise  prove  so 
irritating  as  to  be  almost  irrespirable.  This  is  seen  when  it  has 
been  attempted  to  employ  chlorine  or  iodine  as  inhalations,  and  to 
a  less  extent,  perhaps,  it  is  obvious  with  sulphuretted  hydrogen  or 
fumes  from  sulphur. 

The  substances  that  have  been  used  for  inhalation  with  the  most 
sanguine  hope  of  success  are  creosote,  guaiacol,  eucalyptus,  thymol,, 
menthol,  terebene,  turpentine,  iodoform,  carbolic  acid,  camphor,  ethyl 
iodide,  etc.  These  are  sometimes  given  alone,  or  occasionally  two 
or  more  are  employed  simultaneously,  as,  for  example,  iodine  and 
carbolic  acid.  The  greatest  favor,  perhaps,  has  been  extended  to 
the  inhalations  of  creosote  and  of  guaiacol.  Coghill  recommended 
a  mixture  of  a  drachm  each  of  eucalyptol  and  chloroform,  with  2 
drachms  each  of  creosote  and  phenol.  Some  of  these  volatile  anti- 
septics, instead  of  being  used  directly  upon  an  inhaler,  are  diffused 
through  the  room  occupied  by  the  patient,  this  being  conveniently 
effected  by  the  distribution  in  different  parts  of  the  room  of  saucers 
filled  with  sawdust  upon  which  the  volatile  antiseptic  can  be  poured. 
Occasionally  the  substances  are  inhaled  more  readily  when  given  in 
the  form  of  a  spray.  The  respirator,  even  in  its  simplest  form,  is  an 
unsightly  object,  and  is  apt  to  be  inconvenient  when  patients  have 
to  cough  and  expectorate  ;  accordingly,  it  is  often  found  more  agree- 
able to  inhale  a  spray  for  a  certain  length  of  time  daily  than  to  per- 
sist with  the  troublesome  presence  of  a  respirator. 

It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  this  mode  of  employing  these  anti- 
septics should  not  interfere  with  the  administration  of  other  reme- 
dies internally ;  in  fact,  there  is  no  reason  why  antiseptics  should 
not  be  simultaneously  given  by  the  mouth,  by  inhalation,  and  even 
by  inunction.  Those  who  attach  importance  to  the  use  of  guaiacol 
often  recommend  that  it  should  be  employed  in  all  of  these  ways. 


TUBERCULOSIS.  509 

Several  attempts  have  been  made  of  late  to  apply  antiseptic  reme- 
dies to  the  air  passages  in  more  concentrated  form  by  introducing 
solutions  in  olive  oil  into  the  larynx  by  a  curved  vulcanite  tube 
passed  below  the  vocal  cords.  This  treatment  has  been  recently 
advocated  by  Dr.  Thompson,  of  Cincinnati.'  He  recommends  that 
the  introduction  into  the  trachea  should  be  made  while  the  patient 
takes  a  slow,  deep  inspiration,  and  that  during  the  commencement 
of  the  treatment  the  patient  should  be  anaesthetized  locally  with 
cocaine.  For  tracheal  injections  he  considers  that  menthol  and 
camphor  take  the  front  rank  in  bronchitic  affections,  and  he  main- 
tains that  they  control  cough  more  efficiently  than  morphine.  A 
strong  argument  which  he  advances  in  favor  of  this  treatment  is 
that  medicines  given  in  this  way  do  not  impair  nutrition.  Thus  in 
cases  of  commencing  tuberculosis  where  cough  is  excessive  he  finds 
that  an  injection  of  menthol  and  guaiacol  in  the  evening  will  gen- 
erally enable  the  patient  to  eat  a  good  dinner  and  to  get  an  hour's 
sleep  before  the  paroxysm  of  cough  returns,  and  he  further  states 
that  even  in  long-standing  cases  of  tuberculosis  with  secondary  sup- 
puration, the  septic  fever  and  the  night-sweats  yield  more  readily  to 
tracheal  medication  than  to  remedies  administered  by  the  stomach. 
Although  Dr.  Thompson  does  not  claim  that  tuberculosis  of  the  lung 
can  be  arrested  by  tracheal  injections,  he  maintains  that  many  of  the 
symptoms  induced  by  the  tubercular  infiltration  can  be  controlled  by 
this  method,  without  interfering  with  the  nutrition  of  the  patient, 
in  a  manner  wholly  unknown  to  those  who  use  only  the  oesophageal 
route  for  the  introduction  of  remedies. 

^  Therapeutic  Gazette,  October  15,  1898. 


CHAPTER    XXII. 

TUBERCULOSIS—  Continued. 

Treatment  of  Special  Symptoms  of  Phthisis — Cough — Keflex  or  Mechanical 
Vomiting — Night-sweats — Pyrexia — Diarrhoea — Gastric  Symptoms. 

Cough.  The  cough  of  phthisis  has  frequently  to  be  treated  by 
special  measures,  but  the  treatment  must  be  based  upon  the  estimate 
formed  of  the  nature  of  the  cough.  Sometimes  patients  cough  from 
reflex  irritation  without  any  need  for  expectoration,  the  sensitive 
character  of  the  air-passages  leading  to  frequent  dry  cough  with 
slight  alterations  of  temperature  or  with  other  laryngeal  irritation. 
On  the  other  hand,  when  the  cough  is  associated  with  much  expec- 
toration and  is  indeed  excited  by  the  need  of  removing  fluid,  the 
whole  line  of  treatment  has  to  be  modified.  Dry  cough  has  to  be 
treated  with  sedatives,  such  as  preparations  of  opium  or  morphine, 
which  may  be  given  in  repeated  small  doses  and  combined  with  the 
use  of  demulcents,  such  as  squill,  tolu,  or  licorice.  The  treatment 
at  this  stage  should  resemble  that  ordinarily  adopted  during  the  dry 
stage  of  acute  laryngitis  or  acute  bronchitis.  Frequently  the  dry, 
irritating  cough  may  be  soothed  by  copious  draughts  of  warm  milk 
or  warm  broth.  For  the  relief  of  this  symptom  numerous  mineral 
waters  have  also  been  given,  more  particularly  those  freely  impreg- 
nated with  salines,  and  patients  are  often  sent  to  foreign  health 
resorts  to  drink  the  waters  which  from  their  saline  or  alkaline  nature 
may  diminish  the  frequency  of  cough. 

It  is  important  not  to  adopt  any  measures  which  will  directly 
check  the  morning  cough  which  so  frequently  occurs  in  phthisis^ 
since  this  is  often  excited  by  the  accumulation  of  fluid  within  the  air 
passages  during  the  night,  and  it  commonly  ceases,  or  becomes  less 
frequent,  after  a  few  pledgets  of  expectoration  have  been  removed. 
As  this  morning  cough  is,  therefore,  due  to  local  irritation,  it  should 
be  favored  rather  than  suppressed  by  means  of  sedatives.  A  glass 
of  hot  milk  or  a  cup  of  weak  tea  on  first  arising  may  often  facilitate 
the  removal  of  this  source  of  irritation ;  but  sometimes  it  is  advis- 


TUBERCULOSIS.  511 

able  to  resort  to  further  measures,  such  as  the  administration  of 
saline  draughts  on  waking,  or  the  use  of  a  mixture  containing 
potassium  citrate  or  ammonium  acetate,  or  the  employment  for  a 
few  minutes  of  a  steam  spray,  or  of  an  inhalation  containing  com- 
pound tincture  of  benzoin,  turpentine,  or  guaiacol.  The  use  of  any 
of  these  for  a  short  time  will  often  serve  to  loosen  the  expectora- 
tion, and  thus  to  render  the  act  of  coughing  less  frequent  and  less 
violent. 

When  using  a  spray  or  an  inhalation  in  the  early  morning  it  is 
distinctly  advisable  not  to  continue  the  employment  of  either  for 
more  than  from  five  to  ten  minutes,  or  at  all  events  to  discontinue 
their  use  after  the  relief  of  the  sense  of  irritation ;  and,  further, 
neither  sprays  nor  inhalations  should  be  employed  if  the  circum- 
stances necessitate  an  out-door  occupation.  There  is  always  some 
risk  of  favoring  bronchitic  affections  by  using  inhalations  or  sprays 
shortly  before  going  into  the  open  air,  while,  on  the  other  hand, 
benefit  is  often  experienced  from  them  at  night  when  the  chill  to 
the  surface  of  the  body  on  first  getting  into  bed  provokes  cough- 
ing. 

After  the  removal  of  morning  expectoration  the  treatment  during 
the  rest  of  the  day  must  be  directed  to  diminishing  and  checking  the 
amount  of  liquid  and  mucous  expectoration,  since  this  is  often  copious 
and  it  is  certainly  exhausting.  Reference  has  already  been  made  to 
the  use  of  morphine  or  other  opiates  for  this  purpose.  To  these 
hydrocyanic  acid  may  be  added  with  advantage,  since  it  serves  to 
render  the  parts  about  the  larynx  somewhat  less  sensitive.  Codeine 
is  another  substance  which  has  been  used  fairly  frequently  with  the 
same  object,  and  it  may  be  administered  in  pills  containing  from  ^ 
to  2  grains  of  codeine,  or  of  codeine  phosphate,  or  it  may  be  em- 
ployed with  other  remedies  in  the  syrup  of  codeine,  which  has 
recently  been  introduced  into  the  British  Pharmacopceia,  and  may 
be  given  in  doses  of  from  ^  to  2  fluidrachms ;  it  is  convenient,  per- 
haps, to  bear  in  mind  that  this  preparation  contains  ^  grain  of 
codeine  phosphate  in  the  fluidrachm.  This  syrup  may  be  given 
with  the  fluid  extract  of  licorice  or  other  sedatives  and  flavoring 
agents.  The  syrup  of  wild  cherry  is  often  administered  with  syrup 
of  codeine  as  a  flavoring  agent  unless  there  are  indications  of  dys- 
peptic trouble,  when  the  amount  of  sugar  in  the  two  syrups  might 
prove  objectionable. 

With  the  view  of  alleviating  cough  when  the  expectoration  is  not 


512  TUBERCULOSIS. 

very  profuse,  small  doses  of  aromatic  spirit  of  ammonia  and  morphine 
may  be  given.     The  following  is  a  favorite  formula  : 

H. — Spiritus  ammonise  aromatici    .....      ,^j. 

Morphinse  hj^drochloratis         .         .         .         .         •      gi".  xir- 

This  may  be  mixed  with  a  wineglassful  of  water  to  which  ^  ounce 
of  fresh  lemon  juice  is  to  be  added. 

When  cough  is  very  tiresome  during  the  night  great  care  must 
be  taken  with  the  measures  intended  to  promote  sleep.  As  a  rule, 
especially  when  the  fluid  to  be  expectorated  is  abundant,  it  is  very 
desirable  to  avoid  the  employment  of  morphine  or  opium,  since,  on 
the  principles  already  described  in  connection  with  chronic  bron- 
chitis, this  might  give  rise  to  anxiety  by  depressing  the  reflex  ex- 
citability of  the  larynx,  and  thus  permitting  accumulation  of  fluid 
in  the  air  passages.  Sleeplessness  due  to  the  act  of  coughing  may 
sometimes  be  kept  in  check  by  the  administration  of  chloral  hydrate 
and  potassium  bromide  in  ordinary  doses,  but  the  condition  of  the 
circulation  must  be  borne  in  mind,  and  when  there  is  much  weak- 
ness butyl  chloral  may  be  substituted,  or,  still  better,  the  frequency 
of  cough  may  be  to  some  extent  controlled  by  the  administration  of 
one  or  other  of  the  preparations  of  belladonna.  Small  doses  of  the 
tincture  of  belladonna,  given  at  bedtime,  will  often  allay  cough  and 
reduce  expectoration  sufficiently  to  enable  the  patient  to  obtain  some 
hours  of  refreshing  sleep.  The  same  object  may  be  attained  indi- 
rectly by  the  administration  of  ipecacuanha  and  potassium  iodide. 
If  these  are  given  during  the  day,  expectoration  is  facilitated,  and 
even  though  as  much  fluid  as  before  may  require  removal,  the  act 
of  coughing  is  rendered  less  prolonged  and  less  violent. 

When  the  digestion  permits  the  use  of  cod-liver  oil  the  improve- 
ment in  the  cough  is  often  remarkable.  The  cough  and  expectora- 
tion are  frequently  found  to  diminish  as  the  general  nutrition  is 
improved  and  the  appetite  increased  ;  this  remedy  may,  therefore, 
be  given  with  the  direct  object  of  treating  cough,  although  its 
employment  is  more  generally  dictated  by  the  desire  to  influence 
nutrition. 

In  considering  the  antiseptic  treatment  of  phthisis,  reference  has 
already  been  made  to  the  frequent  employment  of  inhalations  and 
sprays.  Similar  measures  may  be  adopted  for  the  relief  of  cough, 
but  the  substances  thus  used  generally  possess  a  sedative  rather  than 
an  antiseptic  action.     Inhalations  of  the  oil  of  pine,  the  oil  distilled 


REFLEX  OB  MECHANICAL  VOMITING.  513 

from  the  fresh  leaves  of  pinus  pumilio,  have  been  largely  employed 
to  reduce  cough,  while  more  direct  sedatives  are  sometimes  used, 
such  as  the  juice  of  cronium,  the  activity  of  which  is  increased  by 
the  addition  of  potash  or  the  inhalation  of  hydrocyanic  acid — the 
vapor  arising  from  10  to  15  minims  of  diluted  hydrocyanic  acid 
mixed  with  cold  water.  Inasmuch  as  hydrocyanic  acid  is  a  some- 
what dangerous  remedy,  the  aqua  laurocerasi,  which  contains  0.1 
per  cent,  of  hydrogen  cyanide,  is  often  preferred  ;  the  latter  may 
also  be  used  as  a  spray,  so  as  to  affect  the  pharynx  and  larynx. 
When  the  sensitive  character  of  these  parts  persists  in  spite  of  this 
treatment,  relief  may  sometimes  be  afforded  by  a  spray  of  cocaine 
or  of  opium.  In  using  these,  however,  caution  must  be  exercised 
when  there  is  much  fluid  to  be  expectorated,  since,  although  they 
relieve  the  frequent  cough  of  chronic  irritation,  they  are  undesirable 
when  there  is  much  bronchial  catarrh. 

The  act  of  coughing  is  often  associated  with  considerable  pain, 
referred  to  some  spot  over  the  lung,  where,  in  all  probability, 
pleuritic  adhesions  are  present  or  where  tubercular  pleurisy  is  pro- 
ceeding. Under  such  circumstances  measures  to  limit  the  move- 
ments of  the  thorax  must  be  adopted.  Sometimes  great  relief  is 
afforded  by  the  application  of  a  broad  strip  of  plaster  over  the  site 
of  pain,  or  in  place  of  this  the  inflammatory  process  may  be  con- 
trolled to  some  extent  by  the  application  of  counter-irritants  over 
the  affected  area.  Iodine  may  be  painted  on  the  skin,  care  being 
taken  not  to  repeat  the  application  to  the  same  spot  with  sufficient 
frequency  to  cause  blistering.  When,  however,  the  skin  is  unusually 
sensitive,  and  patients,  having  already  been  through  the  treatment 
with  iodine,  do  not  wish  to  repeat  it,  some  relief  may  be  derived 
from  sedative  liniments  or  liniments  with  a  strong  power  of  pro- 
moting counter-irritation.  Belladonna  liniment  may  be  used  in 
this  way,  but  preference  is  often  given  to  liniment  of  turpentine,  or 
of  aconite,  or  to  the  compound  liniment  of  camphor. 

Reflex  or  Mechanical  Vomiting-.  Difficulty  is  sometimes  expe- 
rienced in  deciding  whether  the  vomiting  which  occurs  in  the  course 
of  phthisis  is  the  result  of  cough  or  of  dyspepsia.  It  is  naturally 
important  to  arrive  at  a  conclusion  on  this  point,  since  the  treatment 
of  vomiting  is  markedly  different  under  these  two  conditions.  This 
symptom  may  arise  immediately  after  a  severe  bout  of  coughing, 
and,  as  a  rule,  it  is  then  not  associated  with  any  symptom  of  nausea 
or  of  dyspepsia,  but  is  probably  purely  of  a  reflex  character,  the 

33 


514  TUBERCULOSIS. 

result  entirely  of  chronic  irritation  in  the  pharynx,  which  is  increased 
during  the  act  of  coughing,  and  is  also  favored  by  the  irregular 
movements  of  the  diaphragm  and  of  the  abdominal  muscles.  In 
fact,  the  whole  chain  of  circumstances  strongly  resembles  the  vom- 
iting which  so  frequently  is  seen  during  an  attack  of  whooping- 
cough,  and  although  it  does  not  indicate  any  affection  of  the  stomach, 
it  must  be  controlled  as  early  as  possible,  since  it  interferes  very 
largely  with  the  nutrition  and  comfort  of  the  patient.  In  connec- 
tion with  phthisis,  however,  the  vomiting  ordinarily  occurs  either 
during  a  meal  or  shortly  after  a  meal  has  been  taken,  and  it  may 
arise  when  mastication  and  deglutition  are  interrupted  by  a  short  fit 
of  coughing.  This  form  of  vomiting,  therefore,  must  be  treated  by 
measures  calculated  to  diminish  the  sensitiveness  of  the  pharynx 
and  larynx  rather  than  by  those  intended  to  influence  the  work  of 
the  stomach.  Reflex  vomiting  rarely  occurs  in  phthisis,  unless  there 
is  some  degree  of  bronchial  catarrh,  and  it  has  been  asserted  that 
the  engorgement  of  the  bronchial  vessels,  and,  therefore,  the  amount 
of  fluid  within  the  bronchi,  may  be  increased  shortly  after  food  has 
been  taken,  owing  to  the  greater  amount  of  liquid  passing  into  the 
circulation.  To  relieve  reflex  vomiting  it  is  advisable  to  minimize 
the  liability  to  cough  during  a  meal  by  giving  some  form  of  warm 
stimulant  before  food  is  taken,  which  will,  in  all  probability,  be 
followed  by  cough  and  by  the  removal  of  expectoration.  A  small 
quantity  of  brandy  or  of  aromatic  spirit  of  ammonia  may  be  given, 
together  with  half  a  teacupful  of  hot  milk,  or  of  hot  broth,  half  an 
hour  or  more  before  the  time  of  a  solid  meal. 

Many  of  the  measures  already  enumerated  for  relieving  the  sen- 
sitive character  of  the  larynx  and  pharynx  will  also  tend  to  diminish 
the  liability  to  vomiting.  The  spray  of  cocaine  is  particularly  bene- 
ficial in  these  cases.  It  has  been  also  recommended  that,  where  this 
form  of  mechanical  or  reflex  vomiting  has  occurred,  nourishment 
should  be  taken  in  a  somewhat  concentrated  form,  and  that  a  mini- 
mum of  liquid  should  be  consumed.  Another  device  which  has  been 
found  to  give  good  results,  is  to  favor  the  rapidity  with  which  food 
is  passed  from  the  stomach  to  the  duodenum  by  increasing  the 
digestive  power  with  a  few  grains  of  pepsin  in  conjunction  with  a 
little  diluted  hydrochloric  acid.  This  may  with  advantage  be  given 
during  a  meal  or  immediately  afterward. 

Night-sweats.  It  will  be  convenient  for  the  present  to  defer 
the  consideration  of  the  treatment  of  the  vomiting  of  gastric  origin 


NIOHl-SWEATS.  515 

in  phthisis,  and  to  deal  next  with  a  symptom  of  greater  frequency 
— namely,  night-sweats.  The  night-sweats  of  phthisis  are  extremely 
exhausting,  and  they  occur  most  commonly  when  the  tubercular 
process  is  leading  rapidly  to  much  breaking  down  of  lung  tissue, 
and,  therefore,  they  are  often  most  marked  when  cough  is  severe 
and  expectoration  profuse.  To  some  extent,  therefore,  the  night- 
sweats  are  capable  of  being  controlled  or  diminished  by  many  of 
the  measures  already  described  for  the  treatment  of  cough.  More 
recently,  however,  it  has  been  found  that  the  night-sweats  are  greatly 
reduced  during  the  open-air  treatment  of  consumption,  more  par- 
ticularly during  the  autumn  and  winter  months.  Commonly  they 
are  also  associated  with  great  oscillations  of  temperature,  the  ex- 
hausting perspiration  occurring  during  the  evening  hours,  more 
particularly  during  sleep.  Very  often  patients  will  complain  of 
finding  themselves  bathed  in  perspiration  when  they  wake  to  cough 
during  the  night,  and  still  more  frequently  the  perspiration  is  greatly 
increased  during  or  subsequently  to  the  act  of  coughing. 

For  the  treatment  of  this  symptom  very  numerous  remedies  have 
been  advocated.  Some  are  calculated  to  control  the  tubercular  pro- 
cess, as,  for  example,  calcium  hypophosphite,  which  may  be  given 
in  doses  of  from  3  to  10  grains.  Some,  on  the  other  hand,  such  as 
quinine  and  digitalis,  are  given  with  the  idea  of  controlling  the  tem- 
perature and  increasing  the  strength,  while  arsenic  is  given  also  as 
a  tonic  and  only  indirectly  affects  the  amount  of  perspiration. 
Brunton  has  employed  strychnine,  and  found  that  it  would  arrest 
the  secretion  of  night-sweat  in  phthisis  and  stop  the  debility  which 
usually  accompanies  it ;  but  he  found  that  its  stimulating  effect 
upon  the  respiratory  centre  continued  through  the  day,  and  hence 
irritation  in  the  lungs  caused  more  cough,  so  that,  although  the  night- 
sweats  were  relieved,  the  use  of  strychnine  is  not  without  its  draw- 
backs. On  the  other  hand,  many  astringents  have  been  recom- 
mended for  their  power  of  diminishing  the  action  of  the  skin. 
The  one  which  is  perhaps  most  commonly  employed  is  zinc  oxide, 
which  may  be  conveniently  administered  in  a  pill  of  from  3  to  10 
grains.  Ferric  chloride  in  ordinary  doses  has  been  said  to  relieve 
this  symptom  in  some  cases,  but  it  is  apt  to  promote  constipation, 
and,  therefore,  to  necessitate  the  subsequent  use  of  laxatives.  The 
same  objection  applies  to  many  other  astringents,  which  are  frequently 
used,  such  as  the  pill  of  lead  acetate  (3  grains)  with  opium  (1  grain), 
or  to  the  administration  of  opium  with  copper  sulphate,  the  dose  of 


516  TUBERCULOSIS. 

the  latter  for  this  purpose  being  ^  grain  to  2  grains  Tannic  and 
gallic  acids  have  been  recommended  in  some  cases  and  appear  to 
produce  beneficial  results,  but  they  must  be  employed  in  moderation, 
since  they  are  apt  to  lead  to  dyspeptic  troubles ;  and  the  same  may 
be  said,  though  in  a  less  degree,  of  another  remedy,  namely,  alum, 
which  I  have  used  with  considerable  satisfaction.  I  have  found 
that  alum,  given  in  doses  of  from  3  to  5  grains^  will  frequently 
diminish  the  exhausting  character  of  the  perspirations.  This  remedy 
may  be  given  alone  or  in  conjunction  with  some  aromatic.  Dilute 
sulphuric  acid  and  aromatic  sulphuric  acid  are  often  credited  with 
the  power  of  relieving  night-sweats,  and  they  may  be  administered 
with  remedies  intended  to  diminish  the  frequency  of  cough.  Com- 
fort may  often  be  increased  by  drying  the  surface  and  then  sponging 
it  rapidly  either  with  hot  water  or  with  dilute  acid.  Acetic  acid,  or 
even  vinegar,  is  often  used  for  this  purpose.  The  sponging  should 
be  followed  by  speedy  drying  and  by  a  change  of  garments.  These 
measures  are,  however,  merely  palliative,  and  they  do  not  appear  to 
control  the  amount  of  perspiration  lost. 

The  various  objections  already  urged  against  so  many  of  the  meas- 
ures above  mentioned  do  not  apply  to  the  use  of  atropine  or  of  prepa- 
rations of  belladonna  administered  at  bedtime  ;  but  while  it  is  pos- 
sible by  means  of  these  to  diminish  the  activity  of  the  skin  and  to 
lessen  the  frequency  of  cough  and  expectoration,  they  may  produce 
a  good  deal  of  discomfort  and  dryness  of  the  mouth,  and  they  may 
even  disturb  vision  by  their  influence  on  accommodation  and  on  the 
size  of  the  pupil.  Hence,  although  they  may  be  tried  in  severe 
cases,  it  is  not  wise  to  persist  in  their  employment.  Jaborandi  and 
pilocarpine  have  also  been  recommended,  and  this  is  somewhat 
curious,  inasmuch  as  pilocarpine  is  so  strongly  antagonistic  to 
atropine.  Small  doses,  -^-^  of  a  grain,  of  pilocarpine  nitrate  have, 
however,  been  found  to  check  the  night-sweating  in  phthisis, 
although  larger  doses  are  powerful  diaphoretics. 

Picrotoxin  has  been  administered  hypodermatically  or  by  the 
mouth  in  the  treatment  of  the  night-sweats  of  phthisis.  When 
given  hypodermatically  from  3  to  6  minims  of  a  solution  contain- 
ing 1  part  in  360  of  water  may  be  administered.  When  given  by 
the  mouth  the  dose  is  extremely  small,  being  only  from  y^Q-  to  ^V 
grain  ;  this  dose  may  be  conveniently  mixed  with  milk  sugar  and 
glycerin  of  tragacanth  in  a  pill.  Picrotoxin  is  said  to  have  the 
advantage  of  producing  an  effect  which  lasts  for  several  days,  thus 


PYREXIA.  517 

rendering  its  frequent  administration  unnecessary  ;  on  the  other 
hand,  it  is  extremely  poisonous,  overdoses  causing  stupor,  delirium, 
and  convulsions,  and  it  is  reputed  further  to  be  slightly  cumulative, 
hence  it  must  be  discontinued  after  two  or  three  nights.  Another 
advantage  of  picrotoxin  is  that  it  causes  no  dryness  of  the  mouth 
or  throat,  but  a  recent  writer  says  of  this  drug  that,  although  it  is 
certainly  efficient  in  many  cases,  it  is  not  more  so  than  many  other 
remedies. 

Agaricus  albus  and  agaric  acid  or  agaricin  have  been  strongly 
recommended  for  the  night-sweats  of  phthisis.  In  large  doses  the 
former  acts  as  a  purgative,  but  smaller  doses  (10  to  20  grains)  are 
astringent  and  will  tend  to  arrest  diarrhoea.  Agaricin  can  be  given 
in  a  pill  (dose  -^j  to  ^  grain),  and  to  guard  against  any  tendency  to 
act  upon  the  bowel  as  a  laxative  it  may  be  given  in  conjunction  with 
Dover's  powder. 

Camphoric  acid,  in  doses  of  from  15  to  60  grains,  given  about 
two  hours  before  the  expected  sweats,  is  highly  valued  by  many 
American  physicians. 

Goto  and  cotoin  have  also  been  employed  for  their  astringent  action 
upon  the  skin,  but  they  are  perhaps  more  valuable  in  the  treatment  of 
those  cases  in  which  night-sweats  are  associated  with  much  diarrhoea. 

As  a  whole,  however,  the  symptom  of  night-sweating  appears  to 
be  so  largely  dependent  upon  the  tubercular  changes  occurring  in 
the  lungs  that,  although  it  has  been  deemed  necessary  to  enumerate 
these  palliative  remedies,  the  condition  is  really  best  treated  by  meas- 
ures calculated  to  influence  the  lung  changes.  Of  these  measures 
the  most  hopeful,  as  already  indicated,  consists  in  the  concurrent 
diminution  of  cough,  expectoration,  and  night-sweats  by  the  open- 
air  treatment. 

Pyrexia.  The  daily  range  of  temperature  in  a  case  of  phthisis 
shows  oscillations  which  to  a  certain  extent  are  indicative  of  the 
degenerative  changes  that  are  proceeding ;  the  wider  the  oscillations 
the  more  rapid  are  the  degenerative  changes  in  the  lung.  Hence, 
this  symptom,  like  the  last,  is  one  which  is  best  treated  indirectly 
by  the  employment  of  antiseptics  or  by  change  in  the  hygienic  con- 
ditions which  may  diminish  the  extent  of  lung  degeneration.  Fre- 
quently, however,  it  is  necessary  to  employ  remedies  which  shall 
reduce  the  temperature.  The  wide  oscillations,  in  which  the  high 
temperature  recurs  commonly  at  about  the  same  hour  every  evening, 
naturally  suggest  the  employment  of  quinine,  which  possesses  such 


518  TUBERCULOSIS. 

strong  antiperiodic  powers.  Though  in  cases  of  phthisis,  as  in  cases 
of  ague,  this  drug  has  been  given  in  a  single  large  dose  toward 
evening,  it  is  more  usual  to  give  it  in  smaller  doses  distributed 
throughout  the  day.  Occasionally  some  benefit  follows  its  employ- 
ment, but  the  improvement  is  rarely  comparable  to  that  so  com- 
monly witnessed  in  the  treatment  of  ague.  During  the  administra- 
tion of  quinine,  although  the  daily  range  of  temperature  may  be 
reduced,  oscillations  between  the  morning  and  evening  temperatures 
commonly  remains.  In  all  probability,  quinine  acts  in  these  cases 
mainly  as  a  tonic,  and  possesses  very  little  power  of  influencing  the 
growth  of  the  bacilli  or  the  degeneration  which  is  the  result  of  their 
growth.  When  there  is  much  cardiac  weakness  digitalis  may  be 
combined  with  quinine,  and  sometimes  the  influence  of  the  two  in 
reducing  temperature  is  more  marked  than  when  either  drug  is  used 
alone. 

Whitla  speaks  very  highly  indeed  of  the  value  of  antipyretics, 
such  as  antipyrine  and  antifebrine,  which  he  describes  as  bless- 
ings of  great  value.  His  employment  of  these  drugs  appears  to 
be  somewhat  bold.  He  administers  30  grains  of  antipyrine,  and 
in  an  hour  gives  15  grains  more,  and  in  another  hour  15  grains 
again,  unless  the  temperature  has  fallen  with  the  first  or  second 
dose,  and  he  says  that  he  has  sometimes  observed  a  drop  of  10°  F. 
I  am  afraid  that  I  should  regard  a  fall  of  temperature  to  this 
extent  as  indicating  collapse  of  a  dangerous  nature,  and  I  cer- 
tainly could  not  advise  the  employment  of  antipyrine  in  such 
heroic  doses  ;  indeed,  I  hope  never  to  obtain  such  a  great  fall  of 
temperature  as  the  result  of  any  dose  of  medicine.  With  regard  to 
antifebrine,  Whitla  recommends  4-grain  doses  every  four  or  six 
hours,  and  he  thinks  that  this  drug  produces  a  more  steady  and 
continuous  action  when  given  on  the  small  dose  system.  It  is  some- 
what curious  to  find  that  this  author  states  with  apparent  satisfaction 
that  since  using  antipyrine  he  has  never  had  to  employ  sponging  or 
to  give  wet  packs  for  the  high  temperatures  of  acute  or  chronic 
tuberculosis.  In  my  experience  these  measures  are,  as  a  rule,  to  be 
preferred  to  any  distinct  antipyretic  of  the  nature  of  a  drug,  since 
to  some  extent  they  also  relieve  the  night-sweats,  which  are  so  com- 
monly associated  with  wide  oscillations  of  temperature. 

Salicylates  have  occasionally  been  used  with  a  view  of  reducing 
temperature,  and  they  have  the  advantage  of  acting  to  some  extent 
as  antiseptics. 


DIARRHCEA.  519 

In  most  cases  of  pyrexia  in  connection  with  phthisis,  the  depend- 
ence of  the  pyrexia  upon  lung  changes  must  be  borne  in  mind,  and, 
further,  it  is  well  to  remember  that  many  of  the  antipyretics  which 
are  commonly  prescribed  may,  on  the  one  hand,  produce  dangerous 
collapse,  or  may,  on  the  other,  tend  to  disorder  digestion,  the  latter 
result  being  more  likely  to  occur  in  connection  with  the  use  of  digi- 
talis and  of  quinine  in  antipyretic  doses.  Pyrexia  is  in  general  best 
treated,  like  the  night-sweats  of  phthisis,  by  attacking  the  cause, 
that  is  by  measures  adapted  for  the  control  of  tubercular  changes, 
whether  these  consist  in  the  employment  of  antiseptics  or  in  that  of 
the  open-air  treatment ;  but  should  the  night  temperature  be  unusu- 
ally high,  it  is  better,  in  my  opinion,  to  reduce  it  by  the  use  of  cold 
or  tepid  sponging  than  by  the  administration  of  drugs,  which  not 
uncommonly  introduce  a  new  element  of  danger. 

Diarrhoea.  Sometimes  an  attack  of  diarrhoea  may  occur  in  the 
course  of  phthisis  and  be  of  comparatively  little  moment ;  it  is  only 
when  the  action  of  the  bowels  becomes  unusually  frequent,  and  the 
frequency  is  persistent,  that  the  diarrhoea  is  of  serious  importance. 
This  symptom  is  often  apparently  due  to  a  form  of  enteritis,  which 
may  be  controlled  by  remedies  ;  but  in  severe  cases,  especially  when 
the  symptom  occurs  toward  the  close  of  the  case,  it  is  often  depend- 
ent upon  an  ulcerative  process  affecting  the  solitary  glands  and 
Peyer's  patches.  It  becomes  important,  therefore,  always  to  ascer- 
tain whether  the  symptom  has  its  origin  in  any  error  of  diet  or  in 
any  drug  that  is  being  employed.  Not  uncommonly  in  children  I 
have  found  that  diarrhoea  in  phthisis  is  excited  by  the  use  of  cod- 
liver  oil,  or  by  its  continued  administration  in  overdoses,  and  that 
under  these  circumstances  the  discontinuance  of  the  drug  and  a  little 
caution  in  the  nature  of  the  food  will  often  suffice  to  check  the  con- 
dition. I  have  also  seen  this  symptom  associated  with  the  frequent 
use  of  ipecacuanha,  which  may  be  given  to  assist  in  the  removal  of 
bronchial  secretions.  When,  on  the  other  hand,  it  appears  to  result 
from  some  error  of  diet,  it  may  be  treated,  especially  in  children,  by 
average  doses  of  castor  oil. 

When  the  symptom  is  not  very  severe  it  may  sometimes  be  con- 
trolled by  using  remedies  similar  to  those  employed  in  ordinary  irri- 
tative diarrhoea,  such  as  bismuth  subnitrate  or  salicylate.  This  may 
be  given  in  a  full  dose  (20  grains  of  either),  and  if  the  diarrhoea  per- 
sists it  may  be  given  in  combination  with  opium,  from  5  to  15  min- 
ims of  the  tincture  being  given  with  each  dose. 


520  TUBER  C  UL  OSIS. 

Many  practitioners  prefer  to  treat  the  diarrhoea  of  phthisis  with 
opium  from  the  commencement,  but,  as  previously  indicated,  there 
is  some  risk  in  using  opium  in  large  quantities  when  there  is  much 
expectoration  loading  the  air  passages ;  and  inasmuch  as  this  symp- 
tom of  diarrhoea  most  commonly  occurs  rather  late  in  the  course  of 
the  disease,  the  administration  of  opium  by  the  mouth  is  frequently 
contraindicated.  I  have  for  a  long  time  been  in  the  habit  of  employ- 
ing alum  for  the  control  of  the  diarrhoea  of  phthisis,  and  I  give  it 
in  5-grain  doses,  repeated  three  or  four  times  during  the  day,  in- 
creasing the  dose  little  by  little  if  the  symptom  continues  in  spite  of 
this  treatment.  When  the  diarrhoea  is  dependent  upon  enteritis,  alum 
is  frequently  of  great  service,  and  even  in  cases  associated  with  ulcer- 
ation the  number  of  actions  daily  is  often  reduced  during  its  employ- 
ment. As  a  rule,  this  remedy  is  well  tolerated,  provided  its  admin- 
istration is  commenced  gradually  and  the  dose  increased  only  as 
toleration  is  established  ;  but  I  have  known  it  produce  vomiting  and 
nausea  when  used  for  children  in  injudiciously  large  doses.  Other 
astringents  are  often  used,  as,  for  example,  copper  sulphate,  which 
may  be  given  in  doses  of  from  ^  to  2  grains  in  a  pill.  Lead  acetate 
is  also  frequently  of  service  in  this  condition,  and  can  be  given  in 
the  pill  of  lead  with  opium. 

As  in  the  treatment  of  other  forms  of  diarrhoea,  preparations  con- 
taining tannin  or  gallic  acid  may  be  of  service.  Logwood  is  often 
used,  and  it  may  be  given  in  conjunction  with  the  chalk  mixture  of 
the  Pharmampoeia.  The  effect  of  these  remedies  is  often  greatly 
increased  by  the  simultaneous  administration  of  some  form  of  stimu- 
lant. In  children  I  have  often  seen  diarrhoea  arrested  by  the  mistura 
spiritus  vini  Gallici  of  the  British  Pharmacopoeia,  which  also  appears 
to  counteract  the  exhaustion  which  so  commonly  results  from  this 
symptom.     The  composition  of  this  mixture  is  as  follows  : 

R.— Brandy 4fl§. 

Cinnamon  water     .         .         .         .         .         .         .  4  fl  § . 

Eefined  sugar J  ^  • 

Two  yolks  of  eggs. 

Several  remedies  of  recent  introduction  have  been  strongly  recom- 
mended in  the  treatment  of  the  diarrhoea  of  phthisis.  Tannalbin, 
an  insoluble  compound  of  tannin  with  albumin,  which  contains  about 
50  per  cent,  of  tannin,  has  been  prescribed  in  doses  of  from  5  to  15 
grains,  which  may  be  given  between  or  after  meals,  in  water  or  in 
milk,  and  it  is  credited  with  the  power  of  passing  through  the 


DIABBHCEA.  521 

stomach  unchanged,  and  being  sokible  only  in  the  intestine.  The 
amount  given  may  be  increased  rapidly  should  the  beneficial  action 
not  be  quickly  apparent.  Thirty  grains  have  been  given  as  a  single 
dose,  and  150  grains  in  the  course  of  the  twenty-four  hours.  An- 
other compound  of  tannin,  tannigen,  can  be  given  in  doses  of  from 
3  to  8  grains,  in  cachet,  or  it  may  be  given  in  milk  or  in  gruel,  and, 
like  the  last,  its  action  is  limited  to  the  intestine.  Bismal  is  another 
new  remedy  which  has  been  given  in  this  condition  ;  it  is  a  methylene 
digallate  of  bismuth.  On  account  of  its  astringent  properties  it  has 
been  employed  in  chronic  tubercular  enteritis,  and  when  given  in 
daily  doses  of  30  grains  it  is  stated  to  have  given  satisfactory  results. 
It  is  best  to  commence  its  administration  with  doses  of  from  1  to  5 
grains,  and  to  increase  the  amount  if  necessary.  It  may  be  given, 
like  tannigen,  in  milk  or  in  gruel. 

The  diarrhoea  of  phthisis  is  often  robellious  to  the  ordinary  astrin- 
gents, and  one  remedy  after  another  is  tried  in  vain.  A  compara- 
tively new  remedy,  coto,  therefore,  merits  trial,  and  indeed  it  has 
already  been  credited  with  successes.  Coto,  which  is  not  official,  is 
a  bark,  imported  from  Bolivia,  rich  in  resinous  principles.  It  may 
be  administered  in  the  form  of  a  fluid  extract  (dose  2  to  6  minims), 
a  tincture  (dose  10  minims  repeated),  which  must  be  suspended  with 
mucilage,  or  as  cotoin  (dose  J  to  2  grains),  which  can  be  given  as  a 
pill.  It  will  be  remembered  that  coto  was  one  of  the  ingredients 
of  the  anti-choleraic  mixture  recommended  by  the  Royal  College  of 
Physicians  in  1892,  of  which  the  formula  was  as  follows  : 

R. — Acidi  sulphuric!  aromatici      .....  Tllxv. 

Tincturse  opii  camphoratse      .....  ITLxxx. 

Tincturse  cliloroformi  compositse  ( B.  P. )  1  -  -  -rvi  -^^ 

Tincturse  coto         .         .         .         .         .  i 

Syrupi  aurantii  floris      .         .         .         .         .         •  .^j- 

Aquae  menthse  piperitse  .         .         .         .       q.  s.  ad  §j. 

It  was  advised  that  an  ounce  should  be  given  every  three  or  four 
hours  in  intractable  cases  of  cholera.  The  compound  tincture  of 
chloroform  in  the  above  prescription  is  very  similar  to  chlorodyne. 
The  same  formula  might  be  of  service  in  the  diarrhoea  of  phthisis 
when  other  remedies  have  failed.  Both  the  tincture  and  cotoin  have 
been  credited  with  remarkable  results  ;  indeed,  the  latter  is  said  to  be 
without  an  equal  in  the  treatment  of  this  particular  form  of  diar- 
rhoea, and  both  of  them  appear  to  diminish  the  exhausting  night- 
sweats. 


522  TUBERCULOSIS. 

In  spite  o£  the  numerous  remedies  which  have  been  advocated  for 
administration  by  the  mouth,  it  will  often  be  found  necessary  to  con- 
trol tubercular  diarrhoea  by  the  use  of  enemata  or  suppositories 
containing  opium.  For  an  adult  an  enema  consisting  of  \  fluidrachm 
of  tincture  of  opium  with  2  fiuidounces  of  mucilage  of  starch  will 
often  be  found  beneficial.  It  is  important  not  to  increase  the  bulk 
of  this  enema,  as  a  greater  quantity  is  not  likely  to  be  retained.  In 
cases  of  unusual  irritability  of  the  rectum,  it  is  sometimes  found 
that  even  this  dose  is  speedily  returned,  although  administered 
directly  after  a  motion.  Under  such  circumstances  a  suppository 
of  ^  grain  of  morphine  or  of  lead  acetate  (3  grains)  and  opium  (1 
grain),  or  a  suppository  of  tannic  acid  (3  grains),  may  give  better 
results.  In  intractable  cases,  raore  particularly  in  those  occurring 
in  children,  milk  should  form  a  large  part  of  the  dietary,  and  its 
constipating  effects  may  be  increased  by  mixing  it  with  a  third  of 
lime  water. 

Gastric  Symptoms.  The  gastric  symptoms  in  the  course  of 
phthisis  frequently  call  for  attention  ;  the  earliest  and  commonest 
being  loss  of  appetite,  which  demands  treatment,  since  it  presents 
such  a  serious  obstacle  to  satisfactory  nutrition.  Tonics  are  gener- 
ally beneficial ;  quinine  and  preparations  of  cinchona,  or  one  or  other 
bitter  infusion,  as  gentian,  calumba,  or  quassia,  will  often  cause  im- 
proved appetite,  especially  if  given  with  small  doses  of  some  dilute 
acid.  But  before  adopting  any  form  of  treatment,  it  is  important 
to  impress  upon  the  patient  the  necessity  of  expectorating  the  sputum 
instead  of  swallowing  it — a  disgusting  habit  which  many  may  fall 
into  under  the  impression  that  it  is  less  objectionable  to  those  about 
them.  Until  this  habit  is  corrected,  no  treatment  is  likely  to  be  of 
any  service. 

More  important,  perhaps,  than  the  administration  of  tonics  for  the 
relief  of  anorexia  is  change  of  air,  particularly  for  those  whose  occu- 
pation has  hitherto  rendered  an  in-door  life  almost  a  necessity.  A 
short  residence  at  the  seaside,  or  in  any  country  place  where  the 
conditions  favor  an  out-door  life,  will  be  likely  to  be  followed  by 
speedy  improvement  of  appetite^  It  is  by  no  means  essential  for 
this  result  that  exercise  should  be  taken,  since  it  has  been  found 
that  in  the  open-air  treatment  of  phthisis,  even  when  patients  are 
recumbent  during  the  whole  day,  the  appetite  none  the  less  improves* 
When  dyspepsia  is  of  a  more  advanced  type,  and  is  associated  with 
pain  and  eructation,  it  must  be  treated  on  the  principles  laid  down 


GASTRIC  SYMPTOMS.  523 

for  the  treatment  of  catarrhal  gastritis — that  is  to  say,  the  pain  may 
be  relieved  by  small  doses  of  opium,  while  the  water-brash  often 
gives  way  before  the  administration  of  alkalies  shortly  before  a 
meal.  Sometimes,  however,  in  the  place  of  alkalies,  acids  may  be 
used  in  conjunction  with  bitter  preparations,  and  these  should  be 
given  shortly  after  food.  Of  the  remedies  more  particularly  recom- 
mended in  the  treatment  of  phthisis,  creosote  is  the  one  which  is 
most  likely  to  be  of  service  for  the  relief  of  gastric  catarrh,  provided 
that  the  dose  be  small.  It  must  not  be  forgotten,  however,  that 
when  using  creosote  or  guaiacol  for  their  antiseptic  powers  in  con- 
trolling phthisis,  these  remedies  are  very  likely  to  produce  gastric 
symptoms  ;  hence,  if  they  are  already  being  used  in  fairly  large 
doses,  they  should  be  discontinued  when  the  symptoms  of  dyspepsia 
arise. 

Vomiting  may  occur  in  connection  with  cases  of  severe -gastritis, 
and  it  has  already  been  indicated  that  the  treatment  then  adopted 
must  differ  from  that  used  when  vomiting  arises  after  cough.  The 
vomiting  of  gastritis  is  always  associated  with  much  anorexia,  nau- 
sea, and  probably  with  pain,  which  is  relieved  to  some  extent  by 
the  act  of  vomiting.  Under  these  circumstances  gastric  sedatives 
must  be  used,  such  as  preparations  of  opium,  of  bismuth,  and  per- 
haps hydrocyanic  acid.  Of  the  bismuth  preparations  those  which 
are  insoluble  are  the  most  valuable.  The  subcarbonate,  the  oxide, 
and  the  subnitrate  can  be  given  in  relatively  large  doses  with  mucil- 
age to  suspend  them ;  they  produce  most  beneficial  results  when 
given  upon  an  empty  stomach.  Bismuth  salicylate  has  also  been 
used  for  this  purpose,  and  is  particularly  serviceable  when  salicylic 
acid  is  likely  to  be  required  to  control  fermentative  changes  occur- 
ring in  the  stomach  or  intestine.  It  is  often  found,  however,  that 
simpler  remedies  will  occasionally  relieve  symptoms  of  gastritis  ;  as, 
for  example,  small  doses  of  ammonium  carbonate  and  of  rhubarb, 
given  together  in  a  mixture,  or  in  small  cachets  after  meals,  and 
they  are  especially  beneficial  when  the  gastric  catarrh  is  associated 
with  constipation.  The  latter  symptom  will  sometimes  demand 
special  treatment,  more  particularly  in  those  who  are  confined  to 
their  bed  or  who  are  kept  absolutely  at  rest  during  the  open-air 
treatment.  For  the  relief  of  constipation  the  amount  of  rhubarb 
may  be  increased,  or  sometimes  benefit  will  be  found  to  result  from 
the  daily  administration  of  a  larger  quantity  of  cod-liver  oil.  As 
a  general  rule,  the  milder  laxatives  and  purgatives  give  the  best 


524  TUBERCULOSIS. 

result.  Small  doses  of  aloes  or  of  aloirij  together  with  rhubarb  or 
seuna,  will  generally  be  found  preferable  to  the  use  of  colocynth  or 
of  calomel.  A  mild  purgative  pill,  taken  at  night,  is  often  with 
advantage  succeeded  by  a  dose  of  some  saline  aperient  water  taken 
in  the  early  morning.  A  dose  of  Carlsbad  water,  or  of  Carlsbad 
salts,  a  dose  of  Hunyadi,  or  of  Apenta,  will  generally  tend  largely 
to  increase  comfort. 

Since  the  above  was  written  it  is  interesting  to  find  that  many  of 
the  observations  in  the  foregoing  pages  have  received  valuable  con- 
firmation at  the  recent  International  Congress  on  Tuberculosis.  Dr. 
Pye-Smith  has  written  a  brief  memorandum  on  the  medical  aspects 
of  the  results  of  treatment  laid  before  the  Congress,  from  which  the 
following  conclusions  are  drawn  : 

That  tuberculous  disease  of  the  bones  and  joints,  of  the  glands 
and  skin  and  abdomen,  though  dangerous,  is  not  incurable,  and  by 
the  modern  methods  of  operative  medicine  is  in  most  cases  success- 
fully cured. 

That  tuberculosis  of  the  lungs  (phthisis  or  consumption)  is  fre- 
quently cured,  and  probably  more  often  now  than  formerly. 

That  abundant  food,  particularly  of  a  fatty  nature,  and  a  life  in 
the  open  air  are  no  less  valuable  in  the  treatment  than  in  the  pre- 
vention of  phthisis. 

That  the  influence  of  climate,  altitude,  temperature,  and  dryness 
of  the  air  and  soil,  of  travelling  and  of  sea  voyages,  has  been  very 
differently  estimated  at  different  periods,  and  that  while  each  is  in 
various  degrees  important,  popular  opinion  probably  exaggerates 
their  power. 

That  there  is  no  specific  drug  which  has  direct  influence  upon 
consumption,  but  that  many,  both  old  and  new,  have  valuable 
effects  upon  its  complications. 

That  the  prospect  of  improved  success  in  the  treatment  of  tuber- 
culosis in  general,  and  of  consumption  in  particular,  by  the  advance 
of  pathology  and  the  progress  of  medicine  and  surgery,  is  a  hopeful 
one — almost  as  hopeful  as  that  of  limiting  the  spread  of  the  disease 
by  preventive  measures. 

The  following  observations  are  the  outcome  of  the  work  of  the 
Congress  concerning  the  prevention  of  tuberculosis  : 

a.  The  primary  importance  of  free  ventilation  and  wholesome 
and  abundant  food.  Improvement  in  the  dwellings  and  the  food  of 
the  poorer  classes  in  this  country  and  their  increasing  cleanliuess 


QASTBIC  SYMPTOMS.  525 

and  sobriety  have  not  only  diminished  sickness  generally,  but  directly 
reduced  the  number  of  deaths  from  consumption  until  the  mortality 
from  this  cause  is  less  in  London  than  in  any  other  large  city. 

b.  The  prevention  of  infection  of  the  lungs  by  the  bacillus  of 
tubercle  depends  chiefly  on  rational  treatment  of  the  sputa  of  con- 
sumptive patients,  or,  rather,  for  practical  purposes,  of  the  sputa  of 
all  those  affected  with  cough  and  expectoration.  The  phlegm  should 
never  be  deposited  on  the  ground  or  on  a  handkerchief,  where  it  can 
dry  up  ;  it  should  be  kept  moist  until  it  can  be  destroyed  by  heat, 
and  the  vessel  used  to  receive  it  should  contain  phenol  or  some 

.other  antiseptic  solution. 

c.  The  prevention  of  infection  by  tuberculous  milk  may  be  accom- 
plished either  by  boiling  all  milk  given  as  food  to  children,  or  by 
inspection  of  dairies,  so  as  to  prevent  tuberculous  milch  cows  being 
used. 

d.  The  prevention  of  infection  by  meat  can  be  secured  by  careful 
and  thorough  inspection  of  carcasses,  or  by  diagnostic  testing  of 
cattle  with  tuberculin.  This,  the  only  undoubtedly  useful  applica- 
tion of  the  so-called  tuberculin,  has  the  drawback  that  after  the  effect 
of  the  inoculation  has  passed  off  a  tuberculous  animal  becomes  im- 
mune to  it  for  a  time,  and  so  may  be  passed  as  healthy. 


CHAPTER   XXIII. 

CONSTITUTIONAL  DISEASES. 

Rheumatic  Fever — Chronic  Rheumatism — Chronic  Muscular  Rheumatism, 
Lumbago,  Torticollis,  Pleurodynia. 

Rheumatic  Fever.  The  treatment  of  rheumatic  fever  has  within 
the  last  few  years  undergone  a  complete  change,  and  this  change  is 
claimed  to  be  extremely  beneficial  and  to  have  totally  displaced 
former  methods  of  treatment.  The  present  treatment  is  based  on 
clinical  experience  of  the  actions  of  a  certain  group  of  drugs,  the 
salicyl  group.  This  group,  when  first  introduced,  was  greeted  with 
extravagant  praise,  and  numerous  statistics  Avere  brought  forward 
to  support  the  exaggerated  statements  made  on  its  behalf.  Now 
that  sufficient  time  has  elapsed  for  more  extended  observations,  it 
is,  I  think,  generally  recognized  that  the  benefits  obtainable  with 
the  members  of  this  group  have  been  distinctly  overrated. 

There  is  now  overwhelming  testimony  in  support  of  the  idea  that 
the  condition  known  under  the  name  of  rheumatic  fever  practically 
occurs  in  two  distinct  forms,  one  of  which  is  mild  and  of  short  dura- 
tion, the  other  severe  and  frequently  associated  with  various  com- 
plications. The  former  rarely  calls  for  special  treatment,  this  form 
of  rheumatism  subsiding  in  a  short  time  when  the  patient  has  been 
placed  under  suitable  conditions.  The  latter,  on  the  other  hand, 
requires  more  energetic  treatment,  and  it  is  in  this  severe  form  that 
the  group  of  salicylic  compounds  affords  relief  which  is  beyond  dis- 
pute, even  though  it  does  not  equal  the  extravagant  claims  made  on 
its  behalf  when  first  introduced. 

In  the  milder  form  of  rheumatic  fever  the  symptoms  are  marked 
by  a  moderate  rise  of  temperature  and  by  the  occurrence  of  pain, 
which  may  be  intense,  in  one  or  more  joints.  These  symptoms  are, 
however,  sufficiently  severe  for  patients  to  seek  admission  into  hos- 
pitals, or  for  those  of  a  better  class  to  call  for  advice  and  to  remain 
in  bed.  The  milder  cases  of  rheumatic  fever  include  the  majority 
of  the  rheumatic  patients  who  apply  for  admission  into  hospitals, 
and  though  these  are  now  ordinarily  submitted  to  the  same  plan  of 


BHEVMATIG  FEVER.  527 

treatment  adapted  for  the  more  severe  cases,  it  has  been  found  that 
in  the  large  majority  rest  m  bed  and  modifications  of  diet  may  alone 
be  trusted  to  cause  fall  of  temperature  within  three  or  four  days. 

When  treatment  with  the  salicylic  group  was  introduced  the  mild 
character  of  a  large  number  of  cases  of  acute  rheumatism  and  the 
fall  of  temperature  with  diminution  of  pain,  which,  in  mild  cases, 
occurred  naturally,  was  without  doubt  attributed  to  the  beneficial 
action  of  the  medicinal  remedies  employed.  At  the  present  time  it 
has,  however,  become  so  well  recognized  that  in  all  cases  the  pain 
and  fever  can  be  beneficially  influenced  by  salicylates  that  these 
remedies  are  now  employed  almost  as  a  matter  of  routine  from  the 
commencement  of  the  attack. 

With  the  first  appearance  of  the  symptoms  of  every  case  of  rheu- 
matic fever  the  first  essential  in  the  treatment  consists  in  ordering 
the  patient  immediately  to  bed,  and  in  so  doing  it  is  well  to  remem- 
ber that  since  it  is  possible  that  the  case  may  last  for  many  weeks, 
and  that  it  will  most  probably  be  marked  by  profuse  perspiration, 
it  is  desirable  to  see  that  the  bed  is  comfortable,  and  supplied  with 
a  spring  mattress,  if  possible.  Feather  beds  are  undesirable,  since, 
although  comfortable  when  frequently  made,  they  are  apt  to  become 
extremely  uncomfortable  if  the  patient  is  so  ill  that  it  is  inexpedient 
to  move  him  frequently.  It  is  often  recommended  that  patients 
should  be  placed  between  blankets,  so  as  to  avoid  the  chill  which 
might  otherwise  follow  profuse  perspiration.  Generally,  it  is  suffi- 
cient to  replace  the  lower  sheet  by  a  blanket,  and  to  envelop  the 
patient  in  a  light  woollen  night-gown,  capable  of  being  opened  readily 
from  head  to  foot,  and  with  the  sleeves  split,  so  as  to  afford  the 
greatest  facility  for  the  exammation  of  the  chest  or  for  effecting  a 
change  when  the  shirt  becomes  saturated  with  perspiration.  Com- 
fort is  frequently  increased  by  wearing  a  light  woollen  cape  over 
the  shoulders.  The  painful  joints  should  be  wrapped  in  cotton-wool 
covered  with  a  light  bandage,  and,  with  the  view  of  alleviating  pain, 
all  movements  should  be  discouraged. 

When  the  rheumatism  affects  the  ankles  or  knees  it  is  sometimes 
found  that  even  the  pressure  of  the  bedclothes  is  sufficient  to  cause 
much  discomfort.  This  can  easily  be  avoided  by  the  use  of  a  cradle 
to  support  the  bedclothes. 

With  regard  to  other  treatment,  it  will  be  necessary  to  modify 
the  diet  in  accordance  with  the  degree  of  febrile  disturbance  and  to 
employ  remedies  to  relieve  pain  and  to  check  restlessness  ;  to  admin- 


528  CONSTITUTIONAL  DISEASES. 

ister  a  saline  purgative  at  the  commencement  of  the  treatment,  as  in 
other  febrile  conditions  ;  to  employ  salicin,  salicylic  acid,  or  salicyl- 
ates ;  to  give  copious  draughts  of  liquid,  which  may  with  great 
advantage  be  rendered  alkaline ;  and  later,  if  necessary,  to  employ 
remedies  of  a  tonic  nature,  such  as  quinine. 

Having  thus  briefly  indicated  the  general  line  of  treatment,  it 
will  be  well  to  enter  into  greater  detail.  First,  with  regard  to  diet. 
During  the  height  of  the  fever  this  must  consist  purely  of  liquid, 
and  there  is  considerable  advantage  in  encouraging  the  consumption 
of  fairly  large  quantities  of  fluid  to  replace  the  amount  which  is 
lost  by  the  profuse  perspiration.  Milk  is  usually  extremely  bene- 
ficial, and  patients  may  take  three  pints  or  more  in  the  twenty-four 
hours.  Should  the  milk  disagree  it  may  be  more  easily  tolerated  if 
rendered  alkaline  by  the  addition  of  sodium  bicarbonate  and  sodium 
chloride,  which  may  be  added  in  the  respective  proportions  of  30 
grains  of  the  former  and  15  grains  of  the  latter  to  a  mixture  of  one 
pint  of  milk  with  a  pint  of  boiled  water.  A  jug  containing  such  a 
mixture,  carefully  cooled,  should  be  placed  by  the  patient's  bedside, 
and  8  ounces  or  more  may  be  given  at  frequent  short  intervals. 
Occasionally  this  is  more  readily  taken  if  given  alternately  with 
some  other  cooling  drink,  as,  for  example,  a  mixture  of  lemon  juice 
and  water  with  about  20  grains  of  potassium  bicarbonate  to  the  pint. 
It  is  important  to  notice  that  with  these  cooling  draughts  a  large 
proportion  of  sodium  bicarbonate  and  potassium  bicarbonate  will  be 
administered  in  the  twenty-four  hours,  and  such  an  amount  cannot 
fail  to  have  a  beneficial  influence. 

Passing  next  to  the  medicinal  treatment,  there  is  overwhelming 
testimony  in  favor  of  the  administration  of  members  of  the  salicyl 
group ;  and  although  salicylic  acid  was  the  first  to  be  introduced, 
and  gave  such  satisfactory  results  as  to  pave  the  way  for  the  subse- 
quent administration  of  salicin,  this,  in  turn,  has  been  displaced  to 
a  very  great  extent  by  sodium  salicylate.  Salicylic  acid  is  somewhat 
diflicult  to  administer  on  account  of  its  extreme  insolubility  (1  in 
550  of  water).  It  is  true  that  it  may  be  dissolved  by  the  addition 
of  alkaline  substances,  but  this  so-called  solution  of  salicylic  acid 
is  really  a  solution  of  an  alkaline  salicylate. 

Salicin  is  more  soluble  (about  1  in  28  of  water),  and  has  been 
given  either  in  mixtures,  in  cachets,  or  in  pills.  It  has  an  extremely 
bitter  taste,  which  is  more  persistent  than  the  saline  taste  of  sodium 
salicylate.     It  may  be  administered  in  doses  of  from  5  to  20  grains, 


RHEUM  A  TIC  FE  VEIL  529 

repeated  three  or  four  times  in  the  twenty-four  hours,  and,  as  com- 
pared with  sodium  salicylate,  it  causes  less  cardiac  depression  and 
less  disturbance  of  digestion.  On  the  other  hand,  it  does  not  appear 
to  act  so  rapidly  or  so  effectively.  Salicin  was  introduced  by  Mac- 
lagan  in  1876,  and  in  the  following  year  sodium  salicylate  was 
brought  into  notice,  and  from  that  time  has  maintained  its  ground 
in  the  treatment  of  acute  rheumatism. 

Sodium  salicylate  is  soluble  in  an  equal  part  of  water,  and,  hence, 
can  be  readily  given  in  solution,  although  its  somewhat  unpleasant 
saline  taste  has  occasionally  led  to  its  administration  in  cachets. 
With  salicylic  acid  and  with  sodium  salicylate  toxic  symptoms  have 
been  observed,  but  the  investigations  of  Charteris  have  shown  that 
these  are  dependent  upon  the  presence  of  impurities  due  to  the  arti- 
ficial preparation  of  the  acid  from  carbolic  acid.  The  natural  acid, 
prepared  from  salicin,  from  the  oils  of  wintergreen  and  sweet 
birch,  is  free  from  creosotic  acid,  the  toxic  element  in  the  artificial 
salicylic  acid. 

The  natural  acid  and  its  salts  are  free  from  danger,  but  an  arti- 
ficial acid,  termed  "  physiologically  pure,"  is  often  employed,  as  it 
is  less  expensive. 

Although  the  value  of  salicylic  acid  and  salicylates  in  acute  rheu- 
matism has  been  established  mainly  by  clinical  observation,  an 
interesting  explanation  of  their  mode  of  action  has  recently  been 
suggested. 

Mordhorst^  considers  that  there  is  an  intimate  relationship  between 
gout  and  rheumatism.  He  thinks  the  latter  is  but  a  preliminary 
stage  of  gout,  and  he  attributes  the  pains  and  swellings  of  rheuma- 
tism to  the  formation  of  uratic  granules  in  the  affected  parts.  He 
holds  that  urates  are  deposited  in  granular  form  from  saturated  solu- 
tions under  certain  conditions,  and  he  maintains  that  when  the  urate 
retains  its  granular  form  for  a  longer  or  shorter  time  the  result  is 
seen  in  rheumatism,  but  when  it  becomes  converted  into  crystalline 
sodium  biurate,  gout  is  developed.  On  this  theory  he  explains  the 
benefits  derived  in  rheumatism  from  the  use  of  sodium  salicylate, 
which,  he  believes,  exerts  a  solvent  action  upon  the  granular  urate. 
He  found  experimentally  that  the  addition  of  various  neutral  salts 
of  sodium  to  weak  solutions  of  sodium  carbonate  saturated  with  uric 
acid  caused  precipitation  of  granular  urate,  while  sodium  salicylate 

^  Centralblatt  f.  innere  Medicin,  1898,  vol.  xix.  p.  409. 
34 


53U  CONSTITUTIONAL  DISEASES. 

delayed  the  granular  formation,  or,  if  added  after  the  granules  were 
formed,  it  caused  them  to  be  redissolved,  acicular  crystals  falling 
within  two  to  five  hours. 

He  finds  that  nothing  favors  the  precipitation  of  granules  of  urate 
more  than  the  addition  of  acids,  while  nothing  hinders  this  change 
more  than  the  addition  of  sodium  salicylate,  carbonate,  or  bicarbon- 
ate. But,  on  the  other  hand,  while  sodium  salicylate  hastens  the 
change  of  the  granules  into  uratic  needles  and  cuts  short  the  inflam- 
matory stage,  the  presence  of  the  needles  may  readily  give  rise  not 
only  to  relapses,  but  to  actual  gout.  In  this  way  the  rapid  sub- 
sidence of  the  inflammatory  symptoms,  and  the  frequent  relapses  in 
both  gout  and  rheumatism,  after  the  administration  of  sodium  sali- 
cylate are  easily  explained. 

Another  statement,  which  has  an  important  bearing  on  treatment, 
is  that  the  granular  urate  is  susceptible  of  oxidation,  whereas  the 
crystalline  biurate  is  not.  Administration  of  sodium  carbonate  or 
bicarbonate  does  not  directly  favor  the  solution  of  the  crystalline 
biurate,  but  does  so  indirectly  by  encouraging  the  oxidation  of  uric 
acid  as  it  is  formed,  the  crystals  being  the  more  readily  dissolved 
the  less  the  amount  of  uric  acid  present  in  the  body  fluids.  Finally, 
he  advocates  the  administration  of  the  bicarbonate  in  the  form  of 
those  mineral  waters  which  contain  carbonic  acid  and  common  salt, 
and  are  as  free  as  possible  from  lime. 

When  sodium  salicylate  is  used,  the  benefits  obtained  are  speedy 
diminution  of  pain  and  rapid  fall  of  temperature,  and  beyond  all 
dispute  these  beneficial  results  are  obtained  in  almost  every  case  of 
rheumatic  fever,  but  to  gain  the  greatest  amount  of  benefit  from 
salicylates  much  depends  upon  the  mode  of  administration.  When 
the  patient  comes  under  observation,  as  a  rule,  he  has  been  ill  for 
three  or  four  days,  and  it  is  advisable  to  commence  the  treatment  at 
once  with  a  fairly  large  dose  (30  grains),  and  to  repeat  this  dose 
every  four  hours  during  the  first  twenty-four  hours  unless  the  tem- 
perature meanwhile  falls.  When  the  temperature  falls  and  the 
pains  subside,  it  is  well  to  reduce  the  amount  of  salicylate,  both  in 
actual  quantity  and  in  frequency  of  administration.  Even  in  cases 
of  moderate  severity,  20  grains  may  with  advantage  be  taken  three 
times  a  day,  and  this  dose  should  be  continued  for  a  week  at  least 
after  the  temperature  has  reached  the  normal.  In  yet  milder  cases, 
so  soon  as  the  discomfort  has  passed  away,  the  salicylate  may  be 
reduced  to  15  or  even  10  grains  three  times  a  day : 


RHEUMATIC  FEVER.  531 

R .  — Sodii  salicylatis gr.  xv. 

Spiritus  chloroformi TTL^- 

Liquoris  ammonii  acetatis       .         .         .         .         .  ^ij. 

Aqui3e q.  s.  ad  5J. 

There  is  distinct  advantage  in  employing  a  large  dose  at  the  com- 
mencement of  the  treatment,  and  also  in  reducing  this  dose  as  soon 
as  possible.  Under  the  influence  of  the  large  dose  we  obtain  the 
maximum  benefit  in  a  short  time,  and  thus  curtail  the  duration  of 
suffering,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  well  to  remember  that  a 
large  dose  if  persisted  in  may  produce  symptoms  of  headache,  ring- 
ing in  the  ears,  and  deafness,  comparable  to  the  symptoms  produced 
by  overdoses  of  quinine ;  in  some  cases  hsematuria  may  also  follow 
overdoses  of  salicylates. 

Independently  of  the  distinctly  toxic  symptoms,  salicylates  are 
not  only  prone  to  disturb  digestion,  but  they  may  also  cause  much 
depression. 

To  avoid  nausea  or  sickness  the  salicylate  is  frequently  given  thus  : 

R. — Sodii  salicylatis gr.  xx. 

Aquae  cinnamomi   .  .  .  .  .         .         •      ^j- 

Or  it  may  be  prescribed  in  the  effervescing  form  : 

R. — Sodii  salicylatis      .......  gr.  xx. 

Sodii  bidarbonatis  .......  gr.  xx. 

Syrupi  aurantii       .......  5J. 

Aquse  chloroformi q.  s.  ad  ^jss. 

This  dose  can  be  given  with  17  grains  of  citric  acid  or  a  tablespoon- 
ful  of  lemon  juice.  In  the  latter  case  the  syrup  of  orange  is  replaced 
by  ^  drachm  of  simple  syrup. 

Latham  believes  nausea  may  be  prevented  by  giving  the  natural 
salicylic  acid  in  pills,  which  are  insoluble  in  the  stomach,  but  soluble 
in  the  alkaline  secretions  in  the  duodenum. 

He  recommends^  that  the  only  kind  of  salicylic  acid  employed 
should  be  that  obtained  from  the  vegetable  kingdom.  It  should  be 
prescribed  without  any  alkali  or  base  : 

R. — Acidi  salicylici gi"-  c- 

Pulveris  acacise gr.  xv. 

Macilaginis  acacise  .         .         .         .         .         .      q.  s. 

M. — The  mass  is  allowed  to  stand  and  harden,  and  is  then  divided  into  thirty 
pills.  Each  pill  contains  a  little  more  than  three  grains.  In  acute  rheumatism  a 
dose  of  20  grains  (six  pills)  is  given  every  hour  for  three  doses,  and  then  every 
four  hours,  or  in  sufficient  quantity  to  bring  the  patient  fully  under  the  influence  of 
the  drug,  as  shown  by  buzzing  in  the  ears,  headache,  or  slight  deafness. 

^  Medical  Magazine,  March,  1895. 


532  CONSTITUTIONAL  DISEASES. 

It  has  been  suggested  that  when  the  continued  employment  of 
salicylic  acid  or  salicylates  causes  disturbance  of  digestion,  these 
drugs  might  be  beneficial  if  applied  to  the  skin  as  ointment  or  if 
given  by  rectal  injection.  For  the  former  purpose  the  following 
ointment  may  be  applied  to  the  painful  parts,  covered  lightly  with 
cotton-wool,  and  renewed  night  and  morning  : 

K. — Acidi  salicylici       .......  ^iij. 

Oiei  terebinthinse   .         .         .         .         .         .          .  ^iij. 

Lanolini         ........  ^iij- 

Adipis   .         .         .         .         .         .         .       q.  s.  ad  giij. 

Bourget,^  of  Lausanne,  estimated  the  amount  of  acid  recovered 
from  the  urine  of  patients  under  observation,  and  found  that  absorp- 
tion was  much  more  rapid  when  a  fatty  ointment  was  used  than 
when  the  salicylic  acid  was  mixed  with  vaseline  or  glycerin.  Ruel  ^ 
states  that  the  method  has  been  in  use  for  more  than  six  years  in 
Geneva,  with  excellent  results.  He  advises  that  an  alcoholic  solu- 
tion of  salicylic  acid  be  mixed  with  twice  its  volume  of  castor  oil 
and  applied  on  compresses  covered  with  oil-silk.  If  the  compresses 
are  well  applied,  salicylic  acid  may  be  detected  in  the  patient's  urine 
about  twenty  minutes  after  they  are  put  on. 

Erlanger^  finds  that  although  absorption  from  the  rectum  is  more 
slow,  the  results  are  as  satisfactory  as  when  given  by  the  mouth. 
He  gives  the  following  rules  for  its  administration  :  The  rectum 
should  first  be  emptied  by  a  preliminary  injection  ;  the  solution 
should  be  lukewarm.  The  following  is  a  convenient  formula,  and 
the  patient  must  be  instructed  to  retain  the  clyster  : 

R. — Sodii  salicylatis       .......      3Jss. 

Tincture  opii  .         .         .         .         .         .         .     Hlxv. 

AquEe     . q.  s.  ad     ,^iij. 

The  toxic  symptoms  of  salicylates  may  be  combated  by  the  admin- 
istration of  diluted  hydrobromic  acid,  but  when  used  with  this  object 
the  acid  must  be  given  in  separate  solution,  since  the  result  of  attempt- 
ing to  combine  diluted  hydrobromic  acid  with  sodium  salicylate  is 
that  sodium  bromide  is  formed  and  salicylic  acid  is,  in  all  probability, 
precipitated,  owing  to  its  insoluble  character. 

The  hsematuria  which  occurs  with  sodium  salicylate  is  not  very 
common,  but  the  possibility  of  its  occurrence  should  be  remembered, 

1  Therapeutische  Monat.,  1893,  p.  531. 

2  Kev.  Med.  de  la  Suisse  Kom.,  1893,  p.  484. 

3  La  France  Medicale,  No.  1,  1895. 


RHEUM ATIG  FEVER.  533 

since  otherwise  the  presence  of  blood  in  the  water  may  be  regarded 
as  a  serious  complication,  when  in  reality  it  is  of  little  moment,  since 
it  ceases  with  diminution  in  the  amount  of  salicylate  administered. 

It  was  at  one  time  claimed  in  favor  of  sodium  salicylate  and  of 
other  members  of  this  group  that  the  liability  to  pericardial  and 
endocardial  complications  was  diminished  by  their  administration. 
This  statement  was  one  which  was  extremely  difficult  to  prove  or  to 
disprove.  Certainly,  inasmuch  as  the  duration  and  severity  of  rheu- 
matic fever  are  reduced  by  the  administration  of  salicylates,  it  would 
appear  possible  that  the  liability  to  these  secondary  inflammations  is 
also  diminished.  Practically,  however,  every  case  of  acute  rheu- 
matism must  be  regarded  as  possessing  the  potentiality  of  cardiac 
changes,  and  even  when  the  duration  of  the  disease  has  been  appar- 
ently shortened  by  salicylates,  the  patient  should  be  kept  in  bed  for 
a  time  and  the  treatment  continued,  while  the  character  of  the  sounds 
of  the  heart  should  be  noted  frequently.  It  was  at  one  time  stated 
that  the  employment  of  members  of  this  group  increased  the  liability 
to  relapses.  The  truth  of  this  is,  however,  somewhat  uncertain, 
and  the  occasions  on  which  these  relapses  have  followed  the  employ- 
ment of  salicylates  are,  in  all  probability,  to  be  explained  by  impru- 
dence during  the  early  convalescence,  which  is  peculiarly  likely  to 
occur,  since  the  patient  feels  relatively  well,  and,  in  the  absence  of 
fever  and  pain,  fails  to  see  the  necessity  for  continued  caution. 

Since  the  introduction  of  the  treatment  with  salicylates  many  of 
the  older  forms  of  treatment,  which  in  their  time  had  given  much 
satisfaction,  have  been  discarded.  Perhaps  the  most  important  of 
these  was  the  treatment  with  alkalies,  such  as  potassium  bicarbonate, 
w^hich  long  found  favor  when  prescribed  thus  : 

R. — Potassii  bicarbonatis       ......  gr.  xx. 

Spiritus  ammonise  aromatici   .....  TTIs^x. 

Spiritus  chloroformi TUx. 

Infusi  calumbse       .         .         .         .         .       q.  s.  ad  5J. 

Ev^en  in  the  present  time  the  belief  in  the  treatment  with  alkalies 
has  not  been  entirely  displaced,  and  when  salicylates  are  being  pre- 
scribed, alkalies  are  often  largely  used  with  milk  or  in  the  form  of 
alkaline  drinks.  When  salicylates  disagree,  the  alkaline  treatment 
with  full  doses  of  potassium  bicarbonate  may  be  tried. 

For  the  relief  of  pain  it  is  sometimes  advisable  to  employ  opium, 
though,  as  a  rule,  pain  is  so  far  controlled  by  salicylates  that  there 
is  rarely  any  need  for  more  active  anodynes,  and,  moreover,  opium 


534  CONSTITUTIONAL  DISEASES. 

possesses  the  disadvantage  of  deranging  the  digestion  and  of  favor- 
ing constipation.  When,  however,  pain  persists  in  spite  of  other 
treatment  and  disturbs  the  patient's  sleep,  it  may  be  advisable  to 
give  opium  in  moderate  doses,  especially  at  night-time.  The  disad- 
vantages of  opium  can,  to  some  extent,  be  overcome  by  the  admin- 
istration of  saline  purgatives,  and  even  when  opium  is  not  being 
taken,  saline  purgatives  are  frequently  of  service  in  the  early  treat- 
ment. Opium  is,  however,  perhaps  of  greater  service  when  there 
are  indications  of  endocarditis  or  pericarditis,  since  under  these  con- 
ditions it  not  only  allays  pain,  but  quiets  much  of  the  restlessness 
which  so  frequently  precedes  delirium.  With  endocarditis,  or  with 
pericarditis,  opium  may  be  applied  with  advantage  over  the  cardiac 
area  for  the  relief  of  pain,  but  this  should  not  preclude  the  simul- 
taneous internal  use  of  the  drug. 

Potassium  iodide  has  often  been  recommended  in  the  treatment 
of  rheumatic  fever,  but  it  appears  to  be  of  much  less  service  in  acute 
than  either  in  subacute  attacks  or  in  those  which,  having  started  by 
being  subacute,  tend  to  assume  a  chronic  type.  As  in  gouty  condi- 
tions, the  benefits  which  result  from  the  administration  of  potassium 
iodide  are,  in  all  probability,  largely  due  to  the  depressant  influence 
upon  the  blood-pressure. 

Other  compounds  derived  from  salicylic  acid,  or  containing  sali- 
cylic acid  or  a  salicylate,  are  often  used  in  acute  rheumatism,  although 
salol  — a  combination  of  salicylic  acid  and  carbolic  acid — possesses 
the  inconvenience  of  giving  rise  to  toxic  symptoms  when  employed 
frequently  or  in  large  doses.  Hence,  notwithstanding  its  powerful 
action  as  an  antipyretic,  it  is  not  to  be  recommended  for  habitual 
use. 

Salophen  appears  to  give  more  satisfactory  results  ;  it  was  intro- 
duced to  replace  salol,  owing  to  the  ready  decomposition  of  the  latter 
with  the  elimination  of  phenol.  Salophen  is  only  a  mild  antipyretic, 
though  it  has  frequently  been  found  to  cause  rapid  diminution  of 
pain  and  swelling  in  cases  of  acute  rheumatism.  Like  sodium  sali- 
cylate, however,  it  does  not  appear  to  afford  any  protection  against 
relapses,  nor  does  it  insure  the  absence  of  cardiac  complications.  It 
has  been  employed  in  doses  of  from  10  to  30  grains,  which  are  most 
conveniently  given  in  cachets.  It  has  recently  been  urged  in  favor 
of  salophen  that,  on  account  of  its  rapidity  of  action  and  the  way 
in  which  it  is  tolerated  even  by  the  most  delicate  patient,  it  is  prefer- 
able to  all  other  salicylic  preparations  in  the  treatment  of  this  disease. 


RHEUMATIC  FEVER.  535 

Heference  has  already  been  made  to  the  vakie  of  local  treatinen 
of  the  affected  jomts,  and  the  advantages  of  enveloping  these  in 
cotton-wool,  held  in  place  by  light  flannel  bandages.  Occasionally, 
when  the  pain  is  very  severe,  distinct  benefit  results  from  fixing  the 
limbs  lightly  upon  splints,  so  as  to  insure  immobility.  Occasionally 
it  is  recommended  that  the  cotton-wool  should  be  surrounded  with 
some  impervious  covering,  but  this  is  generally  undesirable,  particu- 
larly when  there  is  very  free  diaphoresis.  The  local  treatment  by 
alkalies,  or  by  anodynes,  has  often  been  advocated,  as,  for  example, 
the  application  of  a  lotion  consisting  of  diluted  laudanum  rendered 
alkaline  by  the  addition  of  sodium  bicarbonate.  This  may  be 
applied  by  soaking  in  the  lotion  strips  of  linen  or  lint,  which  are 
held  in  place  around  the  joints  by  cotton- wool  and  a  light  flannel 
bandage.  Sodium  salicylate  may  be  applied  in  a  similar  way,  and 
recently  the  salicylate  of  methyl  has  been  found  of  some  service. 
Catrin,'  after  trying  the  external  application  of  salicylate  of  methyl 
in  a  series  of  cases  of  acute  rheumatism  and  other  articular  diseases, 
considers  that  though  the  value  of  this  treatment  is  incontestable,  it 
proves  most  efficacious  in  subacute  and  chronic  cases.  Sterling, 
quoted  in  the  same  volume,  draws  attention  to  various  details  con- 
nected with  the  external  application  of  salicylic  acid.  He  believes 
that  variations  in  the  thinness  and  delicacy  of  the  skin  in  different 
individuals  exert  an  influence  upon  the  efficacy  of  the  method,  and 
he  finds  that  Avomen,  as  well  as  young  and  fair  persons,  are  more 
suitable  than  older  people  and  those  of  darker  complexion.  He 
employs  an  ointment  containing  turpentine  as  a  corrosive  of  the 
epidermis,  but  he  discontinues  the  turpentine  when,  after  several 
applications,  the  epidermis  appears  to  be  sufficiently  destroyed.  He 
considers  that  the  perspiration  of  rheumatic  persons  being  retained 
by  an  impermeable  dressing  favors  the  absorption  of  the  drug.  This 
local  treatment  with  salicylic  acid  is,  however,  conjoined  with  the 
simultaneous  administration  of  sodium  salicylate  during  the  earlier 
stages  of  the  attack.  The  advantages  claimed  for  this  double  form 
of  treatment  are  that  smaller  doses  of  salicylate  can  be  trusted  to 
produce  beneficial  effects,  while  gastric  disturbance  is  avoided,  and, 
further,  that,  particularly  among  less  intelligent  classes,  greater  con- 
fidence in  the  treatment  is  insured  by  the  direct  application  of  the 
remedy  to  the  seat  of  pain. 

1  Year-Book  of  Treatment  for  1899,  p.  148. 


536  CONSTITUTIONAL  DISEASES. 

Among  other  local  measures  that  have  been  advocated  must  be 
mentioned  the  employment  of  blisters.  These  have  been  used  more 
especially  over  the  knee-joint ;  they  are,  however,  not  advisable  at 
the  commencement  of  an  attack,  although  they  may  be  of  service 
when  the  pain  and  swelling  continue  in  spite  of  other  forms  of 
treatment.  The  same  remarks  apply  to  the  use  of  Paquelin's 
cautery  for  the  relief  of  acute  rheumatism.  This  treatment  is  too 
severe  to  be  employed  unless  all  other  measures  of  relief  have 
failed. 

Recently  many  attempts  have  been  made  to  prove  that  acute  rheu- 
matism is  an  affection  dependent  upon  some  bacillary  growth,  and 
the  wave  of  bacteriological  investigations  has  been  followed  by 
somewhat  curious  recommendations  for  the  treatment  of  this  dis- 
ease. Thus,  for  example,  the  intravenous  injection  of  corrosive 
sublimate  has  been  advocated ;  but  the  cases  quoted  are  scarcely 
sufficiently  numerous  to  allow  of  any  definite  statements  as  to  the 
value  of  this  treatment,  although  it  is  claimed  that  in  two  cases  in 
which  salicylate  failed  to  give  relief,  injections  of  corrosive  subli- 
mate proved  very  efficacious. 

Yet  more  heroic  is  the  recommendation  to  open,  irrigate,  and 
drain  affected,  joints.  This,  however,  has  been  advised  by  J. 
O'Conor,^  of  Buenos  Ay  res.  This  treatment  results,  apparently, 
from  the  view  that  the  disease  is  to  be  ascribed  to  an  infection 
which,  entering  by  the  tonsils  or  other  channels,  lodges  in  the 
joints,  where  the  poison  is  elaborated  and  poured  into  the  system 
and  thus  conveyed  to  fresh  articulations  and  to  the  heart. 

Several  complications  may  occur  in  the  course  of  rheumatic  fever 
and  call  for  special  treatment.  Hyperpyrexia  is  the  most  important, 
as  it  threatens  life.  The  temperature  may  rise  rapidly  to  108°  F., 
or  even  higher,  and  ordinarily  this  rise  occurs  shortly  after  the  onset 
of  the  fever,  and  is  associated  with  delirium.  During  the  rise  of 
the  fever  the  pulse  becomes  feeble,  there  is  marked  prostration,  and 
the  case  may  end  with  stupor.  Whenever  in  the  course  of  rheu- 
matic fever  the  temperature  rises  rapidly  to  above  105°  F.,  the  use 
of  some  antipyretic  measures  other  than  salicylates  must  be  consid- 
ered. The  drugs  which  have  been  introduced  as  antipyretics — such 
as  antipyrine,  antifebrine,  and  so  on — are  distinctly  not  to  be  em- 
ployed in  this  form  of  pyrexia,  since  they  frequently  tend  to  produce 

1  Glasgow  Medical  Journal,  1898,  p.  269. 


RHEUMATIC  FEVER.  537 

still  further  prostration,  owing,  to  a  great  extent,  to  their  power  of 
interfering  with  the  due  oxygenation  of  the  blood. 

Occasionally  the  hyperpyrexia  may  be  combated  by  an  increased 
dose  of  salicylates,  but  the  weakness  of  the  pulse  will  again  con- 
traindicate  the  employment  of  salicylates  in  very  large  dose,  and  it 
therefore  becomes  advisable  to  employ  antipyretic  measures  which 
either  do  not  influence  the  circulation  or  whose  influence  can  be 
counteracted  by  the  administration  of  stimulants.  The  employment 
of  the  cold  bath  as  a  means  of  reducing  the  temperature  has  often 
been  advocated.  Should  this  be  used,  it  is  well  to  commence  with 
a  temperature  of  from  90°  to  100°  F.,  which  gives  no  fresh  shock 
to  the  system,  and  to  reduce  the  temperature  gradually  by  the  sub- 
sequent addition  of  cold  water  until  the  bath  is  at  or  near  70°  F. 
During  the  time  of  immersion  signs  of  collapse  must  be  carefully 
watched  for,  since  they  call  for  the  immediate  administration  of  some 
diffusible  stimulant,  and  they  may  even  render  it  imperative  that 
the  patient  should  be  at  once  removed  from  the  bath. 

The  patient  must  be  carefully  lifted  from  the  bed  to  the  bath, 
owing  to  the  pain  which  is  likely  to  be  caused  by  any  involuntary 
movement.  Although  the  bath  affords  perhaps  the  quickest  and 
simplest  mode  of  reducing  the  temperature,  it  possesses  the  great 
disadvantage  of  increasing  pain  even  when  the  utmost  care  is  taken, 
and  accordingly  it  is  usually  preferable  to  sponge  the  patient  with 
ice-cold  water,  or  to  rub  the  surface  of  the  body  with  lumps  of  ice 
enveloped  in  flannel.  When  employing  either  of  these  methods  the 
temperature  may  be  still  further  reduced  by  giving  fragments  of  ice 
frequently.  Ordinarily,  as  the  temperature  of  hyperpyrexia  falls, 
the  delirium  and  other  urgent  symptoms  pass  away. 

The  cardiac  complications  have  already  been  mentioned.  Peri- 
carditis is  readily  recognized  owing  to  the  pain  and  to  the  friction 
sounds,  and  it  calls  for  the  administration  of  opium  and  for  local 
treatment  with  leeches,  poultices,  or  blisters,  which  have  already 
been  mentioned  in  the  description  of  the  treatment  of  pericarditis. 
Endocarditis  is,  unfortunately,  not  so  easily  detected  in  the  early 
stages,  since  the  characteristic  murmurs  may  be  absent  when  there 
is  but  little  dilatation  of  the  orifices  or  but  little  obstruction  to  the 
course  of  the  circulation.  Or,  again,  the  feeble  sounds  of  com- 
mencing endocarditis  may  be  entirely  masked  by  the  rasping  fric- 
tion sounds  of  pericarditis,  or  by  an  excessive  accumulation  of  fluid 
in  the  pericardium.     When,  however,  the  occurrence  of  endocarditis 


538  CONSTITUTIONAL  DISEASES. 

is  suspected,  opium  must  be  administered,  and,  as  a  rule,  it  is  well 
to  give  tonic  remedies,  such  as  arsenic  and  iron,  while,  if  the  pulse 
becomes  rapid  or  irregular,  digitalis  or  strophanthus  should  be  used- 

Sometimes,  with  pericarditis  or  with  endocarditis,  marked  cerebral 
symptoms  may  arise,  and  should  be  dealt  with  partly  by  the  con- 
tinued use  of  anodynes  or  narcotics  and  partly  by  the  administration 
of  stimulants.  The  supervention  of  mild  cerebral  symptoms  in  the 
course  of  rheumatic  fever  almost  always  forms  an  indication  for  in- 
creasing the  amount  of  stimulant.  In  children  cerebral  symptoms 
may  often  be  associated  with  chorea,  but  chorea  more  commonly 
makes  its  appearance  when  the  conjoined  symptoms  have  not  been 
very  severe,  although  the  rheumatic  nature  of  the  attack  has  been 
indicated  by  slight  pains,  and  perhaps  by  endocardial  or  pericardial 
complications.  When  chorea  occurs  during  the  course  of  rheumatic 
fever  in  children,  it  is  best  treated  by  salicylates  and  stimulants,  the 
administration  of  arsenic  and  iron  being,  perhaps,  of  greater  service 
in  the  more  common  form  of  chorea  which  occurs  subsequently  to 
an  attack  of  acute  rheumatism. 

Pulmonary  complications,  such  as  pneumonia  and  pleurisy,  occa- 
sionally arise,  especially  in  cases  marked  by  endocarditis  and  peri- 
carditis, but  these  complications  are  to  be  treated  upon  general  prin- 
ciples, since  the  association  with  rheumatic  fever  does  not  influence 
the  course  of  these  affections  except  in  so  far  as  it  adds  to  their 
gravity. 

It  remains  to  mention  the  treatment  advisable  during  convales- 
cence. The  chief  feature  of  this  treatment  lies  in  enforcing  rest 
long  after  the  patient  feels  absolutely  well,  and  this  rest  is  the  more 
important  when  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  heart  has  been 
affected,  even  though  no  murmurs  may  be  heard.  It  is  a  fact  of 
common  experience  that,  under  such  conditions,  if  patients  are 
allowed  to  leave  their  beds  at  an  early  date  and  to  resume  their 
ordinary  occupations,  they  will  probably  within  a  few  weeks  or 
months  come  back  for  treatment  with  well-developed  cardiac  mur- 
murs. Hence,  rest  is  an  essential  during  convalescence,  and  even 
after  the  patient  has  been  allowed  to  get  up  he  must  be  counselled 
to  avoid  any  form  of  exercise  or  occupation  which  entails  strain 
upon  the  valves  of  the  heart. 

During  the  period  of  rest  the  diet  should  be  gradually  rendered 
more  nutritious  and  more  solid.  Nourishing  broths  may  gradually 
give  place  to  fish  and  chicken,  and  these  in  turn  may  make  way  for 


CHRONIC  RHEUMATISM.  539 

small  quantities  of  well-cooked  meat.  During  convalescence  small 
quantities  of  stimulant  may  be  given,  but  this  should  preferably 
consist  of  well-diluted  spirit  rather  than  of  wine  or  beer,  and  unless 
there  is  much  weakness  of  the  pulse,  stimulants  will  probably  be 
unnecessary.  Usually  during  this  time  benefit  follows  the  admin- 
istration of  quinine,  of  iron,  or  of  arsenic,  and  iron  and  digitalis  are 
especially  of  value  when  the  pulse  remains  rapid  after  pericardial 
or  endocardial  trouble. 

The  return  to  the  normal  condition  is  frequently  slow,  and  when 
dealing  with  rheumatic  fever  which  has  lasted  some  weeks  it  is 
advisable,  even  after  the  temperature  has  fallen,  to  continue  the  use 
of  salicylates  for  another  fortnight ;  and  indeed  they  may  be  resumed 
from  time  to  time  if  there  is  still  complaint  of  pain  about  the  joints. 
With  regard  to  prophylactic  treatment,  it  is  well  to  remember  that 
one  attack  of  acute  rheumatism  occurring  in  a  young  adult  fre- 
quently forms  the  precursor  of  other  attacks,  and  that  though  the 
first  attack  may  be  mild,  subsequent  attacks  may  be  marked  by 
symptoms  of  greater  severity.  Hence,  those  who  have  once  suf- 
fered from  rheumatic  fever  should  be  warned  of  the  dangers  of  a 
recurrence,  of  the  need  of  avoiding  exposure  to  damp  and  chill,  and 
of  the  necessity  of  warding  off  these  dangers  by  wearing  warm,  light 
clothing  of  an  absorbent  character,  so  as  to  diminish  the  risk  of  chill 
after  mild  perspiration.  Should  the  patient's  means  permit,  con- 
valescence may  be  hastened  by  residence  in  a  warmer  climate,  and 
the  liability  to  subsequent  attacks  may  be  lessened  by  spending  the 
winter  in  southern  California. 

Chronic  Rheumatism.  There  is  some  tendency  at  the  present 
time  to  exclude  chronic  rheumatism  from  the  list  of  diseases,  and 
to  refer  chronic  conditions  of  pain  connected  with  the  limbs  and  the 
joints  either  to  osteo-arthritis,  the  so-called  rheumatic  gout,  or  else 
to  true  gout.  It  is,  however,  a  clinical  fact  that  many  forms  of  pain 
defy  the  treatment  applicable  to  these  two  conditions,  while  they  are 
relieved  by  measures  which  are  but  modifications  of  the  treatment 
of  acute  rheumatism.  It  must  further  be  noted  that  these  painful 
conditions  frequently  arise  under  circumstances  which  are  ordinarily 
credited  with  the  power  of  exciting  rheumatism,  while,  apart  from 
pain,  most  of  the  clinical  features  of  osteo-arthritis  and  of  gout  are 
absent. 

It  will  be  convenient  to  consider  the  treatment  of  this  affection 
under  two  distinct  headings — viz.,  Chronic  Articular  Rheumatism 


540  CONSTITUTIONAL  DISEASES. 

and  Chronic  Muscular  Rheumatism,  the  latter  including  many  forms 
to  which  special  names  have  been  applied. 

Chronic  articular  rheumatism  may  occur  as  a  sequel  to  an  acute  or 
subacute  attack,  but  more  commonly  it  arises  independently,  and  is 
marked  chiefly  by  pain  on  movement,  together  with  an  almost  in- 
appreciable degree  of  thickening  of  the  structures  around  the  joints. 
This  thickening  may  be  found  to  depend  upon  slight  inflammatory 
action  affecting  the  capsule  and  ligaments,  with  similar  changes  in 
the  synovial  membrane,  which  may  result  in  slight  effusion.  Fre- 
quently the  adjacent  sheaths  of  tendons  partake  in  the  inflammation, 
and  the  formation  of  adhesions  increases  the  pain  and  difficulty  of 
movement.  It  is  somewhat  characteristic  of  this  affection  that  one 
or  two  joints  only  are  ordinarily  attacked,  also,  that  although  there 
may  be  much  pain  and  impaired  mobility,  these  discomforts  may  be 
completely  overcome  by  passive  movements.  It  is  rare  for  marked 
constitutional  symptoms  to  be  present,  unless  the  condition  has  so 
far  limited  activity  that  the  general  health  suffers.  When  febrile 
symptoms  occur,  the  pains  are  to  be  referred  to  recurrent  attacks  of 
subacute  rheumatism  rather  than  to  chronic  rheumatism. 

Chronic  articular  rheumatism  is  best  treated  by  the  adoption  of 
local  measures,  although  it  is  to  some  extent  capable  of  being  reduced 
by  internal  medication.  The  local  measures  which  are  of  the  greatest 
service  are  those  which  promote  freedom  of  circulation  through  the 
affected  part,  and  this  indication  may  entail  the  employment  either 
of  counter-irritants  or  of  other  measures  which  promote  restoration 
of  the  powers  of  movement.  Of  the  counter-irritant  measures  the 
application  of  iodine  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  painful  part  is  per- 
haps the  one  most  generally  adopted.  This  will  frequently  lead  to 
desquamation,  and  may  perhaps  produce  a  blister,  especially  when 
the  iodine  is  used  daily  in  concentrated  form.  When  this  occurs, 
the  iodine  must  be  discontinued,  as  otherwise  it  would  cause  intense 
pain.  Since,  however,  the  affection  is  chronic,  it  is  better  to  avoid 
the  above  results  by  painting  successive  bands  around  the  affected 
part  and  not  repeating  the  application  to  the  same  spot  daily. 

In  very  chronic  conditions  which  resist  this  form  of  treatment 
more  energetic  counter-irritation  may  be  obtained  by  the  use  of 
Paquelin's  cautery  or  by  the  application  of  small  flying  blisters 
around  the  affected  joint.  When  the  surface  has  peeled  off  after 
either  of  these  forms  of  treatment,  passive  movements  may  be  made, 
and  the  limb  may  be  rubbed  gently  with  the  liniment  of  potassium 


CHRONIC  RHEUMATISM.  541 

iodide.  (Soap,  Sij ;  potassium  iodide,  ojss ;  glycerin,  floj  ;  oil  of 
lemon,  floj ;  and  distilled  water,  ox.)  When  there  is  much  comj)laint 
of  pain,  equal  parts  of  chloroform  and  opium  liniments  (equal  parts  of 
soap  liniment  and  tincture  of  opium),  or  of  chloroform  and  belladonna 
liniments,  may  be  used,  the  liniment  being  applied  to  the  joint  upon 
lint,  and  the  movements  restricted  by  surrounding  the  joint  with 
cotton-wool.  Should  there  be  distinct  evidence  of  effusion  which 
does  not  diminish  when  any  of  the  above  forms  of  treatment  have 
been  applied,  liniment  of  mercury  (ointment  of  mercury,  strong 
water  of  ammonia,  camphor  liniment)  and  liniment  of  potassium 
iodide  with  soap  (the  formula  as  given  above),  in  equal  proportions, 
may  be  similarly  applied  to  the  joint.  The  action  of  any  of  the 
above  remedies  may  be  favored  by  the  previous  use  of  a  hot  douche, 
which  assists  local  dilatation  of  vessels,  and  hence  favors  absorption. 

Reference  has  already  been  made  to  the  value  in  these  cases  of 
passive  movements  and  of  massage.  These  serve  not  only  to  pro- 
mote the  circulation  in  the  affected  part,  but  also  to  break  down 
recent  adhesions  and  to  increase  the  strength  of  the  affected  limb. 
Occasionally  electricity  is  used  in  conjunction  with  massage;  this 
is  most  serviceable  when  the  muscles  have  become  somewhat  atro- 
phied. Some  observers,  however,  maintain  that  continuous  currents 
will  favor  the  restoration  of  the  limb  to  the  normal  size  and  will 
also  diminish  pain.  Although,  in  the  treatment  of  this  condition, 
it  has  long  been  customary  to  send  patients  to  hot  springs,  it  is  gen- 
erally admitted  that  the  character  of  the  mineral  springs  is  of  very 
secondary  importance,  while  the  chief  benefit  is  derived  from  the 
massage,  the  movements,  and  the  actual  temperature  of  the  water. 

Before  resorting  to  any  of  the  springs,  it  is  well  to  note  that  there 
are  certain  dangers  incidental  to  their  employment.  These  are  seen 
most  markedly  in  the  discomforts  experienced  by  those  who  suffer 
from  heart  disease  or  from  kidney  disease,  and  the  tendency  to  faint- 
ing is  considerable  when  the  patient  is  advanced  in  years.  With 
these  reservations,  however,  much  relief  may  ordinarily  be  obtained 
from  a  short  course  at  one  of  the  thermal  waters ;  but  there  is  little 
doubt  that  the  benefit  is  to  some  extent  due  to  the  change  of  air 
and  to  the  general  hygienic  conditions  which  are  usually  enforced. 

The  treatment  of  chronic  articular  rheumatism  by  remedies  admin- 
istered internally  is  generally  full  of  disappointment,  and  in  a  large 
number  of  cases  it  may  be  doubted  whether  much  good  is  derived 
from  any  treatment  other  than  the  adoption  of  tonic  measures.     To 


542  CONSTITUTIONAL  DISEASES. 

some  extent,  those  who  suffer  from  this  form  of  rheumatism  are 
ordinarily  rather  debilitated ;  and  they  may  improve  with  tonics, 
such  as  quinine,  or  the  various  salts  of  iron,  or  sometimes  with 
preparations  of  arsenic.  But  when  it  is  desired  to  adopt  measures 
more  particularly  directed  against  the  rheumatic  tendency,  some  of 
the  drugs  which  are  most  to  be  trusted  for  the  acute  form  of  rheu- 
matism are  of  very  little  service.  Occasionally  sodium  salicylate  or 
salicin  may  afford  some  relief,  particularly  if  administered  at  the 
time  when  the  rheumatic  pains  are  most  pressing,  especially  if  the 
attack  appears  to  have  any  distinct  reference  to  exposure  to  cold  or 
damp,  and  also  when  the  condition  is  marked  by  any  slight  oscilla- 
tion of  temperature.  For  the  ordinary  chronic  form  of  pain  v/ith 
limitation  of  movement  these  drugs  are  of  little  avail. 

In  the  more  chronic  forms  of  the  affection  full  doses  of  potassium 
iodide  or  of  sodium  iodide  may  be  tried,  and  should  the  condition  be 
due  to  gonorrhoeal  infection  they  may  be  beneficial,  although  under 
such  circumstances  it  is  essential  that  measures  should  be  adopted 
for  the  treatment  of  the  cause.  Thus,  iodides  are  occasionally  of 
greater  service  when  given  with  potassium  bicarbonate  in  fairly 
large  dose,  but  with  any  of  the  foregoing  remedies  it  is  always 
advisable  to  combine  the  administration  of  some  form  of  stimulant 
— as,  for  example,  aromatic  spirit  of  ammonia — either  with  the 
medicine  or  with  the  food,  so  as  to  counteract  the  depressant  influ- 
ence of  these  drugs.  Sulphur  may  be  given  internally  with  the 
view  of  acting  as  a  slight  laxative,  and  when  patients  are  unable 
to  visit  any  of  the  sulphur  springs  they  frequently  derive  advan- 
tage from  the  use  of  the  confection  (sublimed  sulphur,  §iv ;  potas- 
sium tartrate,  oj ;  powdered  tragacanth,  gr.  xviij ;  syrup,  flgij ;  tinc- 
ture of  orange,  flgss ;  glycerin,  fl.Sjss),  the  lozenge  (precipitated  sul- 
phur, gr.  V ;  potassium  bitartrate,  gr.  j ;  sugar,  gr.  viij ;  acacia, 
gr.  j ;  tincture  of  orange,  tt\^j  ;  mucilage  of  acacia,  rrLj),  or  the 
compound  licorice  powder.  Should,  however,  all  these  measures 
have  been  tried  without  success,  it  is  advisable  to  employ  remedies 
which  are  more  commonly  given  in  the  treatment  of  gouty  condi- 
tions. 

Some  cases  of  chronic  articular  rheumatism  improve  with  moder- 
ate doses  of  colchicum,  either  of  the  wine  of  the  root,  in  doses  of  10 
to  30  drops,  or  the  extract,  in  doses  of  J  to  1  grain,  which  may  be 
given  conveniently  in  pill  form  with  eunonymin  or  with  the  extract 
of  cascara  sagrada ;  a  preparation  of  guaiacum  may  also  be  used. 


CHRONIC  RHEUMATISM.  543 

The  dietetic  and  hygienic  treatment  of  chronic  articular  rheuma- 
tism is  somewhat  more  satisfactory,  since,  by  modifications  of  diet 
and  by  due  regukxtion  of  exercise,  considerable  benefit  may  be 
obtained.  Should  the  patient  be  obviously  in  a  weak  state  of 
health,  the  diet  may  require  to  be  rendered  more  nutritious,  having 
due  regard,  however,  to  the  tendency  to  constipation  and  to  other 
digestive  disturbances.  In  general,  it  is  well  to  avoid  the  use  of  all 
forms  of  alcoholic  beverages,  particularly  those  which  are  fermented 
and  contain  saccharine  principles.  Sometimes,  however,  digestion 
appears  to  be  improved  by  a  small  quantity  of  whiskey  or  of  brandy 
taken  with  or  after  the  principal  meals. 

There  is  considerable  evidence  to  show  that  those  who  suffer  from 
this  affection  may  derive  benefit  from  great  reduction  in  the  ordi- 
nary quantity  of  meat,  while  at  the  same  time  the  amount  of  fresh 
vegetables  and  fruit  is  increased.  To  some  extent  this  improvement 
is  perhaps  referable  to  the  diminution  of  habits  of  constipation, 
though  doubtless  the  vegetable  acids  are  of  service. 

With  regard  to  exercise,  it  is  always  well  to  encourage  rheumatic 
patients  to  indulge  in  moderate  forms  of  athleticism,  since  this  will 
not  only  serve  to  diminish  the  fixation  of  the  joints,  but  it  will  also 
improve  the  general  condition.  The  association  of  this  malady  with 
damp  suggests  the  use  of  warm  woollen  clothing,  and  indicates  also 
that  those  whose  means  permit  should  pass  the  winter  months  in 
some  warm,  dry  climate. 

Chronic  3IusGular  Rheumatism.  Chronic  muscular  rheumatism 
differs  from  the  foregoing  in  affecting  special  muscles  rather  than 
the  joints,  although  it  resembles  it  in  the  pain  produced  by  move- 
ment and,  to  some  extent,  m  the  chronic  type  of  the  malady.  This 
condition  has  received  various  names  according  to  the  special  muscles 
affected,  such  as  lumbago,  torticollis  or  stiff  neck,  and  pleurodynia. 
It  is  characteristic  of  this  affection  that,  although  it  is  chronic  in  its 
course,  the  onset  is  usually  acute.  The  pain  may  commence  quite 
suddenly  with  what  appears  to  be  very  slight  provocation,  as,  for 
example,  some  overstrain  or  movement  in  which  the  individual  is 
scarcely  conscious  of  having  put  forth  any  particular  exertion.  This 
is  seen  in  the  most  marked  way  with  the  onset  of  lumbago.  The  affec- 
tion, however,  may  also  result  from  constant  strain  of  special  groups 
of  muscles,  as,  for  instance,  from  the  stiffness  which  ensues  after  pro- 
longed railway  travellmg,  especially  if  the  conditions  have  necessitated 
the  maintenance  of  an  awkward  posture  for  many  hours  in  succession. 


544  CONSTITUTIONAL  DISEASES. 

The  treatment  of  this  affection  must  to  a  large  extent  dej^end 
upon  the  site  of  the  attack  and  upon  its  severity.  The  first  essen- 
tial in  severe  cases  is  to  secure  rest  and  warmth,  so  that,  although 
the  disease  is  not  in  itself  serious,  it  may  entail  rest  in  bed  for  some 
days  when  large  groups  of  muscles  are  attacked.  Even  in  lumbago, 
^vhich  is  frequently  regarded  as  a  trifling  affection,  complete  rest  will 
often  shorten  the  attack,  and  so  long  as  the  patient  remains  in  one 
position  he  may  be  free  from  pain.  When,  however,  the  pain  con- 
tinues, or  is  extremely  severe,  it  may  call  for  the  administration  of 
narcotics,  of  which  morphine  is  undoubtedly  the  most  convenient. 

Some  forms  of  chronic  muscular  rheumatism  may  be  much  relieved 
by  the  local  application  of  dry  heat,  of  which  the  well-known  domes- 
tic remedy  for  lumbago  furnishes  a  good  example.  This  consists 
in  the  application  of  a  hot  flat-iron  over  the  affected  part,  which  is 
protected  by  one  or  two  layers  of  flannel.  When  this  treatment  is 
inconvenient,  benefit  may  result  from  the  inunction  of  stimulating 
liniments,  such  as  that  of  turpentine,  the  good  effect  being  undoubt- 
edly due  in  great  part  to  the  friction  and  massage  of  the  affected 
muscles.  In  severe  chronic  lumbago,  which  resists  these  measures, 
relief  may  sometimes  be  obtained  by  the  use  of  dry  cupping.  When 
the  condition  affects  a  large  number  of  muscles,  a  hot  bath  may  be 
very  beneficial ;  the  muscular  relaxation  and  the  free  circulation 
and  perspiration  which  result  all  tending  to  relieve  the  condition. 

With  regard  to  internal  remedies,  the  powder  of  ipecacuanha  and 
opium,  given  repeatedly  during  the  day,  will  often  reduce  pain  ;  but 
should  the  opium  disagree,  further  relief  may  sometimes  be  obtained 
by  the  use  of  the  lithium  carbonate  or  citrate,  and  potassium  bicar- 
bonate. These  drugs  are  more  particularly  useful  in  those  cases  in 
which  the  evidence  of  concentration  of  the  urine,  indicated  by  a 
high  specific  gravity  and  by  the  deposition  of  various  renal  salts, 
indicates  that  the  symptoms  may  perhaps  have  their  origin  in  a 
gouty  diathesis. 

When  the  onset  is  less  acute  and  the  course  is  more  chronic,  the 
affection  may  defy  the  above-mentioned  remedies ;  various  addi- 
tional forms  of  local  treatment  may  then  be  used — in  fact,  the 
treatment  will  resemble  very  closely  that  ordinarily  adopted  in 
cases  of  chronic  articular  rheumatism.  For  example,  it  may  be 
advisable  to  employ  counter-irritants  over  the  affected  part,  such  as 
iodine,  or  the  liniment  of  potassium  iodide  with  soap  (soap,  oij ; 
potassium  iodide,  ojss ;  glycerin,  fl,5J ;  oil  of  lemon,  floj ;  and  dis- 


CHRONIC  RHEUMATISM.  645 

tilled  water,  flox) ;  or,  in  more  inveterate  cases,  flying  blisters  may 
be  serviceable,  while  the  actual  cautery  or  Paquelin's  cautery  may 
sometimes  be  required. 

The  intimate  relation  of  gout  and  of  rheumatism  is  perhaps  most 
fully  demonstrated  clinically  in  this  group  of  cases,  which  lend  some 
support  to  Mordhorst's  supposition  of  the  dependence  of  rheumatism 
upon  forms  of  granular  urates  which  are  deposited  in  the  affected 
areas.  This  supposition  will  also  serve  to  explain  the  immediate 
benefit  which  may  occasionally  follow  the  use  of  salicylates,  even 
though  the  chronic  condition  is  only  alleviated  and  not  cured.  The 
following  mixture  is  often  useful  in  some  forms  of  lumbago  : 

H .  — Sodii  salicylatis gr.  x. 

Potassii  iodidi gr-  v. 

Extract!  sarsaparillse  fluid!     .         .         .         .         .  ^ij. 

Aquae     .         .         .         .         .         .         .       q.  s.  ad  ^ss. 

M. — Sig.    To  be  taken  in  water  thrice  daily,  after  meals. 


CHAPTER    XXIV. 

CONSTITUTIONAL   DISEASES— Continued. 

Gout — Theoretical  Considerations — Acute  Gout — Subacute  and  Chronic   Gout — 
Metastatic  Gout — Irregular  Symptoms  referable  to  Gout — Osteo-arthritis. 

Gout.  The  number  of  diseases  and  of  symptoms  which  have 
been  referred  to  this  condition  are  almost  endless,  and  although 
many  of  these  must  be  dealt  with  as  manifestations  of  gout,  it  will 
be  convenient  in  the  first  place  to  consider  the  disease  in  two  main 
forms — the  acute  and  the  chronic — reserving  for  subsequent  con- 
sideration those  symptoms  which  appear  beyond  doubt  to  depend 
upon  the  same  cause,  even  though  their  origin  is  not  at  first  sight  so 
manifest. 

The  various  views  that  have  been  taken  of  the  pathology  of  gout 
need  scarcely  detain  us  here,  although  it  may  be  of  service  to  state 
briefly  that  all  observers  appear  to  be  agreed  upon  the  importance 
of  uric  acid  and  its  compounds  in  connection  with  the  causation  of 
gout.  The  researches  of  the  late  Sir  William  Roberts  and  others 
have  shown  that  uric  acid  forms  three  classes  of  salts  :  First,  a  class 
of  neutral  urates,  in  which  a  metal  takes  the  place  of  all  displace- 
able  hydrogen  ;  these  neutral  urates  do  not  exist  in  the  living  organ- 
ism, although  they  may  be  obtained  by  chemical  processes.  Second, 
a  class  of  biurates,  in  which  a  metal  takes  the  place  of  part  of  the 
displaceable  hydrogen,  thus  forming  acid  salts  comparable  to  sodium 
bicarbonate,  and,  like  this  salt,  although  chemically  it  may  be  termed 
an  acid  salt,  in  reality  the  biurate  gives  no  acid  reaction  to  test 
papers.  Third,  the  quadriurates,  whose  composition  is  best  ex- 
plained by  stating  that  a  metal  takes  the  place  of  one-fourth  of  the 
displaceable  hydrogen  in  two  uric  acid  molecules. 

The  important  biurates  and  quadriurates  which  occur  in  the  body 
are  the  sodium  salts,  and  it  appears  to  be  now  generally  recognized 
that  of  these  two  the  quadriurate  saturates  in  the  blood  of  gouty 
subjects,  and  that  this  compound  is  an  unstable  body  which  ulti- 
mately may  unite  with  some  of  the  sodium  carbonate  of  the  blood, 
and  thus  form  sodium  biurate.     I'he  quadriurate  is  comparatively 


ACUTE  GOUT.  547 

soluble,  while  the  biurate  is  comparatively  insoluble ;  hence,  when 
the  biurate  has  been  formed  in  any  quantity,  it  is  readily  deposited 
in  crystals  in  various  structures,  and  this  deposition  of  sodium 
biurate  appears  to  be  the  immediate  exciting  cause  of  an  acute  attack 
of  gout.  The  deposition  ordinarily  occurs  within  the  synovial  mem- 
branes, and  leads  first  to  the  accumulation  of  crystals  upon  and  within 
the  articular  cartilage,  and,  secondly,  to  a  form  of  inflammation  to 
which  many  of  the  symptoms  are  directly  referable. 

Since  the  treatment  of  gout  may  to  some  extent  be  influenced  by 
the  views  held  of  its  pathology,  it  may  be  interesting  here  to  give 
the  conclusions  which  have  been  recently  arrived  at  by  Dr.  Luff  as 
to  the  pathology  of  gout :  ^ 

1.  Uric  acid  is  not  normally  present  in  the  blood  of  man  and 
other  mammals,  nor  in  the  blood  of  birds. 

2.  Uric  acid  is  normally  produced  only  in  the  kidneys. 

3.  Uric  acid  is  normally  formed  from  urea,  probably  by  conjunc- 
tion of  that  substance  with  glycocin  in  the  kidneys. 

4.  Uric  acid  is  present  in  the  blood  in  gout  as  the  soluble  sodium 
quadriurate.  In  its  soluble  form  it  is  not  a  toxic  agent.  It  deposits 
from  the  blood  as  sodium  biurate,  which  acts  passively  and  physi- 
cally as  a  foreign  body  in  the  tissues  or  organs  in  which  it  is  depos- 
ited. 

5.  The  presence  of  uric  acid  in  the  blood  in  gout  is  due  to  its 
deficient  excretion  by  the  kidneys,  and  to  the  subsequent  absorption 
of  the  non-excreted  portion  into  the  blood  from  these  organs. 

6.  Gout  is  probably  always  preceded  by  some  affection  of  the 
kidneys,  functional  or  organic,  which  interferes  with  the  proper 
excretion  of  uric  acid.  The  probable  seat  of  the  kidney  affection 
giving  rise  to  gout  is  in  the  epithelium  of  the  convoluted  tubes. 

7.  In  certain  blood  diseases  and  disorders  accompanied  by  leuco- 
cytosis,  uric  acid  is  formed  within  the  system  from  nuclein.  In  such 
circumstances  it  passes  at  once  into  the  blood,  and  is  rapidly  elim- 
inated by  the  kidneys. 

Acute  Gout.  The  symptoms  which  precede  an  attack  of  acute 
gout  are  sometimes  ill  defined.  Occasionally  there  may  be  slight 
pain  in  one  or  more  of  the  joints,  but  more  commonly,  in  spite  of 
some  previous  tendency  to  dyspepsia  and  mental  depression,  the 
individual  feels  better  shortly  before  the  immediate  onset  of  the 

^  Gout,  its  Pathology  and  Treatment,  pp.  103,  104. 


548  CONSTITUTIONAL  DISEASES. 

attack.  Frequently  this  onset  occurs  during  the  night,  the  patient 
waking  with  severe  pain,  which,  in  the  first  attack,  usually  com- 
mences in  the  great  toe.  This  pain  rapidly  increases,  and  is  always 
intensified  by  the  slightest  movement.  Sometimes  it  is  followed  by 
a  moderate  rise  of  temperature,  which,  however,  may  fall  with 
diminution  of  pain  and  with  slight  perspiration.  The  part  affected 
is  then  found  to  be  somewhat  swollen,  the  skin  shining  and  tense, 
and  the  veins  in  the  neighborhood  distended.  After  this  acute  onset 
the  pain  may  return  on  successive  nights  for  a  week  or  even  a  fort- 
night. As  the  swelling  subsides  the  pain  diminishes,  but  is  replaced 
by  much  irritation  of  the  skin,  which  may  pit  on  pressiire  and  will 
subsequently  desquamate. 

Of  the  minor  phenomena  of  an  attack  of  gout  it  may  be  men- 
tioned that  the  temperature  rarely  rises  above  100°  to  102°  F.,  that 
even  with  this  temperature  there  is  much  thirst  and  anorexia,  and 
that  the  urine  is  commonly  scanty,  high-colored,  and  cloudy  from 
deposition  of  urates.  In  addition,  it  sometimes  contains  a  small 
amount  of  albumin.  This,  however,  is  ordinarily  transient,  dis- 
appearing entirely  after  the  severity  of  the  attack  has  passed  off. 
Sometimes  the  albuminuria  is,  however,  permanent,  and  is  an  indi- 
cation of  chronic  renal  trouble. 

Although  an  acute  attack  of  gout  commonly  commenc  es  in  tli 
great  toe,  the  site  affected  may  be  determined  by  any  previous  slight 
injury  or  strain ;  sometimes  the  knee,  the  elbow,  or  the  wrist  may 
take  precedence  of  the  great  toe. 

The  treatment  of  an  acute  attack  of  gout  must  be  considered  with 
reference  partly  to  local  treatment,  partly  to  general  internal  medi- 
cation. Concerning  the  former,  the  most  important  indication  is  to 
allay  pain  as  early  as  possible.  To  some  extent  this  may  be  reduced 
by  the  position  of  the  affected  limb.  It  should  be  slightly  raised 
upon  a  soft  pillow,  so  as  to  be  a  little  above  the  level  of  the  body, 
and  the  weight  of  the  clothes  should  be  taken  off  by  means  of  a 
suitable  cradle.  In  spite  of  the  inflammatory  appearance  of  the 
affected  part,  it  is  better  to  avoid  the  application  of  leeches  or  the 
employment  of  blisters  to  act  as  a  counter-irritant,  as  these  appear 
to  have  no  beneficial  effect.  Advantage  results,  however,  from  the 
application  of  warm,  soothing  lotions,  and,  pending  the  arrival  of 
a  suitable  medicinal  lotion,  some  relief  will  often  be  obtained  by 
packing  the  affected  limb  with  a  light,  warm  fomentation,  which 
can  be  enveloped  in  cotton-wool  and  surrounded  with  oil-silk. 


ACUTE  GOUT.  549 

Greater  relief  is,  however,  afforded  by  the  use  of  alkaline  lotions 
containing  half  an  ounce  of  sodium  carbonate  to  a  pint  of  warm 
water,  or,  if  the  lotion  is  not  prepared  on  the  spot,  the  same  amount 
of  sodium  carbonate  in  half  the  quantity  of  water  may  be  obtained 
and  mixed  with  an  equal  bulk  of  hot  water  when  required  for  use. 
The  sedative  action  of  this  lotion  may  be  increased  by  the  addition 
of  a  couple  of  drachms  of  laudanum. 

Many  other  local  applications  have  been  recommended,  as,  for 
example,  a  mixture  of  morphine  hydrochlorate,  10  grains,  with  lini- 
ment of  belladonna,  3  ounces,  which  is  to  be  used  on  lint  under  oil- 
silk,  after  mixing  a  teaspoonful  with  a  tablespoonful  of  hot  water. 
Liniments  have  also  been  suggested  of  menthol,  camphor,  or  opium, 
or  of  morphine  hydrochlorate  with  atropine.  The  last  may  be  pre- 
pared with  oleic  acid,  so  as  to  contain  15  grains  of  morphine  and  3 
grains  of  atropine  in  an  ounce  of  oleic  acid,  and  may  be  painted 
over  the  painful  part  previous  to  wrapping  the  limb  in  cotton-wool. 
In  general  terms  it  may  be  stated  that  the  applications  which  in- 
volve the  least  movement  and  the  fewest  changes  are  those  which 
appear  to  be  most  comforting. 

At  the  commencement  of  the  attack  the  treatment  should  include 
the  use  of  purgatives,  of  sedatives,  and  of  specific  remedial  agents. 
The  selection  of  a  purgative  may,  perhaps,  to  some  extent,  be  influ- 
enced by  the  patient's  wishes,  especially  if  he  has  had  previous  ex- 
perience of  gouty  attacks.  Ordinarily,  however,  it  will  be  found 
beneficial  to  emjDloy  a  fairly  brisk  purgative,  such  as  3  or  4  grains 
of  blue  mass,  and  the  action  may  be  increased  by  the  addition  of  ^ 
grain  of  podophyllum  resin  or  of  a  couple  of  grains  of  euonymin. 
Such  a  pill,  taken  at  night-time,  should  be  followed  by  the  use  of 
a  saline  mixture  in  the  early  morning.  This  mixture  should  have 
magnesium  sulphate  as  its  principal  ingredient.  This  was  frequently 
given  in  the  effervescent  form,  but  inasmuch  as  this  involves  the 
presence  of  sodium  bicarbonate,  it  is,  according  to  most  modern 
views,  inadvisable.  Other  salines  or  purgative  mineral  waters  may 
be  employed,  but  those  which  contain  sodium  are  contraindicated. 

The  selection  of  the  sedative  must  be  guided  by  the  existing  symp- 
toms, and  still  more  by  knowledge  of  the  previous  medical  history 
of  the  patient.  Naturally,  the  severity  of  the  pain  appears  to  call 
for  the  employment  of  opium  or  of  morphine,  but  these  remedies 
are  frequently  dangerous  when  the  individual  is  the  subject  of  chronic 
kidney  mischief  ;  hence,  they  must  be  avoided  whenever  a  small  trace 


550  CONSTITUTIONAL  DISEASES. 

of  albumin  has  been  detected,  unless,  indeed,  previous  knowledge  of 
the  patient  renders  it  certain  that  this  presence  of  albumin  is  a  nat- 
ural symptom  of  the  existing  attack  rather  than  an  indication  of 
chronic  kidney  mischief.  Certainly,  with  patients  seen  for  the  first 
time  it  is  safer  to  avoid  the  internal  administration  of  morphine  or 
opium,  especially  when  there  is  a  small  amount  of  albumin,  the  only 
exception  to  this  rule  in  gout  being  when  the  age  or  weakness  of  the 
patient  renders  the  continuance  of  pain  even  more  dangerous.  Under 
these  circumstances  it  is  best  to  give  opium,  either  as  the  tincture  or 
as  Dover's  powder,  rather  than  to  inject  morphine  subcutaneously. 

Occasionally,  benefit  results  from  the  employment  of  hyoscine 
hydrobromate  or  of  hyoscyamiue  sulphate — two  hypnotics  which 
can  frequently  be  used  in  the  presence  of  chronic  kidney  mischief. 
These  give  better  results  than  many  of  the  other  hypnotics,  such  as 
chloral,  trional,  or  paraldehyde,  which  are  often  recommended. 
Some  observers,  however,  speak  with  great  confidence  of  the  bene- 
fits obtainable  from  a  mixture  of  chloral  hydrate,  potassium  bromide, 
and  tincture  of  hyoscyamus. 

The  measures  hitherto  enumerated  must  be  regarded  as  palliative 
rather  than  curative,  and  we  must  trust  to  the  use  of  other  drugs  for 
the  cure  of  the  attack  or  for  the  reduction  of  its  duration.  In  this 
connection  there  has  been  much  difference  of  opinion  of  late  years, 
and  it  is  impossible  to  give  satisfactory  directions  for  the  curative 
treatment  without  entering  upon  somewhat  debatable  ground.  Most 
observers  are,  however,  agreed  at  the  present  time  that  the  first  essen- 
tial during  an  acute  attack  is  to  bring  the  patient  thoroughly  under 
the  influence  of  colchicum.  This  drug  had  perhaps  fallen  into  some 
discredit,  owing  to  the  inordinate  doses  employed,  and  for  a  time  it 
was  replaced  in  practice  by  various  alkalies,  and  more  recently  strong 
statements  have  been  made  concerning  the  value  of  salicylates  in 
promoting  the  elimination  of  uric  acid.  Apart  from  the  employ- 
ment of  overdoses  it  is  possible  that  the  disinclination  to  employ 
colchicum  was  to  some  extent  the  result  of  the  difficulty  of  explain- 
ing its  action  on  any  satisfactory  pharmacological  grounds  ;  while, 
on  the  other  hand,  experimental  evidence  seemed  to  favor  both  the 
use  of  the  alkaline  carbonates  and  perhaps  also  of  the  salicylates. 

Colchicum  appears  to  be  beneficial  when  the  wine  of  the  root  is 
used  in  doses  of  from  15  to  20  minims  at  the  commencement  of  the 
attack,  the  quantity  given  being  subsequently  reduced  to  from  5  to 
10  minims  when  administered  three  times  during  the  day.     There 


ACUTE  GOUT.  551 

is  much  evidence  to  show  that  the  action  of  colchicum  may  be  in- 
creased by  the  addition  of  potassium  citrate,  in  doses  of  40  grains, 
which  acts  as  a  diuretic  and  diminishes  the  acidity  of  the  urine. 
The  influence  of  the  two  is  to  reduce  inflammation,  to  relieve  pain, 
and  to  shorten  the  attack. 

Various  theories  have  been  put  forward  to  explain  the  good  results 
obtained  from  the  use  of  colchicum.  It  has  been  suggested  that  the 
benefit  might  be  partly  due  to  a  diminution  of  the  uric  acid  produc- 
tion, thus  arresting  the  absorption  of  uric  acid  from  the  kidneys, 
and  so  preventing  the  .further  deposition  of  biurate  in  the  affected 
parts.  Colchicum  is  certainly  a  powerful  cholagogue,  and  may  thus 
check  the  formation  of  glycocin,  and  hence  reduce  the  amount  of 
uric  acid  formed  in  the  kidneys.  In  support  of  this  view  may  be 
mentioned  the  clinical  fact  that  the  elimination  of  uric  acid  is  always 
diminished  when  colchicum  is  being  taken. 

During  the  employment  of  colchicum  it  has  been  pointed  out 
that  diuresis  commonly  occurs  together  with  increased  secretion  of 
the  stomach,  the  intestine,  the  liver,  and  the  skin,  and  it  has  been 
recommended  accordingly  that  the  drug  should  be  given  in  sufficient 
quantity  to  cause  these  increased  secretions,  but  that  the  amount 
should  stop  short  of  producing  nausea  and  vomiting.  With  regard 
to  the  relative  action  on  the  kidneys  and  on  the  skin,  it  is  commonly 
found  that  diuresis  is  greatest  when  diaphoresis  is  slight.  The  chief 
argument  against  the  employment  of  colchicum  lies  in  the  vascular 
depression  which  may  ensue  after  using  large  doses,  but  this  argu- 
ment tells  rather  against  the  continuous  employment  of  colchicum 
in  large  doses  than  against  its  use  in  fairly  large  doses  at  the  com- 
mencement, and  in  moderate  doses  subsequently. 

The  value  of  sodium  salicylate  rests  upon  a  much  more  uncertain 
basis,  since,  although  some  observers  speak  very  highly  of  it,  others 
state  that  it  has  been  found  useful,  but  inferior  to  colchicum. 
Others,  again,  consider  this  remedy  dangerous,  more  particularly 
when  there  are  any  indications  of  renal  disease.  Dujardin  Beau- 
metz  practically  recommends  that  sodium  salicylate  should  be 
avoided  if  albumin  is  present  in  the  urine.  I  must  admit  that  I 
have  employed  this  drug  somewhat  largely  in  cases  of  acute  gout, 
but  although  it  has  occasionally  appeared  to  diminish  pain,  it  has 
certainly  caused  no  material  shortening  of  the  attack,  and  on  several 
occasions  I  have  thought  that  the  duration  of  the  attack  had  per- 
haps been  increased  by  it. 


552  CONSTITUTIONAL  DISEASES. 

With  regard  to  the  administration  of  alkalies,  though  this  rests 
upon  a  large  amount  of  clinical  and  experimental  work,  their  use  of 
late  years  has  been  assailed,  notably  by  the  late  Sir  William  Roberts 
and  by  Dr.  Luff.  The  former  considered  that  the  use  of  alkalies 
depended  upon  the  hypothesis  that  by  increasing  the  alkalinity  of 
the  blood  they  increase  its  solvent  power  on  materials  of  gouty  de- 
positions, and  he  maintained  that  alkalescence,  as  such,  has  no  in- 
fluence whatever  on  the  solubility  of  sodium  biurate.  Dr.  Luff's 
experiments  have  led  him  to  the  following  conclusions  : 

1.  The  alkalinity  of  the  blood  is  apparently  not  appreciably  dimin- 
ished during  a  gouty  attack. 

2.  The  solubility  of  uric  acid  in  the  blood  is  not  affected  by  a 
diminished  alkalinity  of  the  blood  produced  by  the  addition  of 
organic  acids. 

3.  The  deposition  of  sodium  biurate  is  not  accelerated  by  a  diminu- 
tion of  the  alkalinity  of  the  blood. 

4.  An  increased  alkalinity  of  the  blood  does  not  increase  the  solu- 
bility of  deposits  of  sodium  biurate. 

5.  The  administration  of  the  ordinary  alkalies  of  lithium  salts, 
of  piperazine,  and  of  lysidine,  with  the  object  of  removing  gouty 
deposits,  appears  to  be  useless. 

6.  No  general  acidity  of  the  system  is  associated  with  gout. 

7.  No  relationship  exists  between  the  acidity  of  the  urine  and  the 
alkalinity  of  the  blood. 

8.  The  administration  of  salicylates  with  the  object  of  removing 
gouty  deposits  appears  to  be  useless,  and  their  employment  in  the 
treatment  of  gout  is  contraindicated. 

During  the  first  day  or  two  of  an  acute  attack  of  gout  the  diet  of 
the  patient  must  be  restricted  entirely  to  milk,  since  it  is  important 
that  no  articles  should  be  given  which  favor  the  increased  formation 
of  uric  acid  :  the  so-called  milk  diet  may  include,  in  addition  to 
milk,  the  thickening  of  the  milk  by  various  carbohydrates,  as,  for 
example,  with  taj)ioca,  rice,  or  sago,  or  the  use  of  bread  and  milk 
or  arrow-root  and  milk.  This  form  of  diet  should  be  continued  so 
long  as  the  pain  is  severe,  but  with  the  subsidence  of  the  acute 
attack  increased  liberality  of  diet  may  be  permitted,  though  for  a 
length  of  time  it  is  advisable  to  avoid  the  use  of  any  strong  soups, 
meat  extracts,  or  essences,  on  account  of  the  large  proportion  of 
nitrogenous  material  they  contain  and  their  tendency  to  promote 
the  formation  of  uric  acid.     The  only  indication  for  the  employ- 


SUBACUTE  AND  CHRONIC  OOUT.  553 

meiit  of  alcohol  during  an  acute  attack  must  be  found  in  the  weak- 
ness of  the  pulse,  whether  this  is  due  to  the  nature  of  the  remedies 
that  have  been  employed  or  whether  it  is  a  constitutional  condition. 
Should  the  use  of  stimulants  appear  to  be  imperative,  it  is  best  to 
resort  to  whiskey,  well  diluted  with  warm  water,  or  with  Salutaris 
water,  in  preference  to  any  of  the  alkaline  waters  which  may  con- 
tain sodium. 

Subacute  and  Chronic  Gout.  The  treatment  of  subacute  and 
chronic  gout  is  almost  as  important  as  the  treatment  of  an  acute 
attack,  and  when  once  the  gouty  diathesis  has  been  declared,  meas- 
ures must  be  taken  to  ward  off  subsequent  attacks  and  to  relieve 
the  discomforts  incidental  to  gout,  when  it  occurs  in  the  chronic  or 
subacute  form.  The  chief  indications,  so  far  as  prophylactic  treat- 
ment is  concerned,  lie  in  the  prevention  of  the  formation  of  uric 
acid  and  of  its  conversion  into  biurates.  These  processes  can,  to  a 
large  extent,  be  hindered  by  measures  which  favor  the  due  elimina- 
tion of  nitrogenous  waste,  while  at  the  same  time  the  dieting  and 
the  habits  will  require  suitable  modification.  Subsequently  to  an 
acute  attack,  colchicum  may  still  be  used  in  small  doses,  so  long  as 
there  is  no  pain  or  enlargement  about  the  joints.  Frequently,  how- 
ever, as  the  severity  passes  off,  complaint  is  made  of  the  depressant 
action  of  colchicum,  and  it  then  becomes  necessary  to  administer 
either  potassium  iodide  or  guaiacum. 

The  following  prescriptions  for  mixtures  containing  potassium 
iodide,  to  be  taken  three  times  a  day,  are  often  employed  in  London 
hospitals : 


R. — Potassii  iodidi 

Ammonii  carbonatis 
Infusi  gentianae  compositi 

R .  — Potassii  iodidi 

Spiritus  ammonise  aromatici 
Infusi  quassiae 


R .  — Potassii  iodidi 

Spiritus  ammoniae  aromatici 
Infusi  gentiante  compositi 
Aquae     .... 


gr-  "J- 

gr.  V. 
lUxv. 


^  iv. 

s.  ad     5j. 


Guaiacum  is  somewhat  difficult  to  prescribe,  owing  to  the  nauseous 
appearance  of  most  mixtures  of  this  drug,  due  to  the  precipitation 
of  the  resin.  The  composition  of  the  mistura  guaiaci  of  the  British 
Pharmacopoeia  is  as  follows  : 


554  CONSTITUTIONAL  DISEASES. 

E. — Guaiacum  resin    .  .  .  .  .  .  •  J  §■ 

Kefined  sugar       .  .  .  .  .  .  •  J  ^  • 

Powdered  tragacanth  .  .  .  .  .  .  35  gr. 

Cinnamon  water  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  20    ^ . 

The  dose  is  J  to  1  ounce,  and  is  not  very  readily  taken,  and  the  same 
applies  to  the  ammoniated  tincture  of  guaiacum  of  the  United  States 
Pharmaeopma.  Although  undoubtedly  guaiacum  resin  lozenges  are 
more  often  used  for  throat  affections  than  for  their  constitutional 
effect,  they  may  be  given  with  benefit,  provided  they  do  not  produce 
too  much  diarrhoea.  This  symptom  is  somewhat  readily  produced 
by  preparations  of  guaiacum,  and  although  some  degree  of  laxative 
action  is  desirable  subsequently  to  an  acute  attack  of  gout,  the  guaia- 
cum may  have  to  be  discontinued  if  this  symptom  causes  much 
discomfort.  Frequently  it  is  desirable  to  stimulate  the  action  of  the 
liver  from  time  to  time  by  other  laxatives  in  addition  to  guaiacum, 
as,  for  example,  by  euonymin  and  blue  mass  or  calomel ;  while  some 
patients  find  it  ad  viable  to  use  either  the  compound  licorice  powder, 
or  the  confection  of  sulphur,  or  the  sulphur  lozenge,  to  obtain 
greater  regularity  of  action,  since  the  general  tendency  is  toward 
constipation. 

Moderate  diuresis  should  be  promoted  by  the  free  use  of  diluents, 
and  of  these  the  most  satisfactory  is  water,  which  should  be  taken 
both  on  retiring  to  rest  and  on  first  rising.  Some  patients  prefer 
to  take  warm  or  rather  hot  water,  and  maintain  that  it  not  only 
causes  less  disturbance  of  digestion,  but  even  promotes  digestion, 
if  taken  almost  as  hot  as  it  can  be  tolerated  after  meals.  I  am  con- 
vinced that  much  harm  has  been  done  to  the  digestive  organs  by  the 
drinking  of  water  at  too  high  a  temperature,  though  at  a  moderate 
temperature  beneficial  results  may  ensue.  Those  with  a  gouty 
diathesis  may  find  that  the  water  is  more  readily  taken  if  about  a 
third  of  its  bulk  of  cold  milk  is  added,  and  this  mixture  taken  at 
night  will  often  promote  sleep  and  break  the  habit  of  taking  stimu_ 
lants  before  bedtime. 

With  the  view  of  obtaining  greater  diuretic  action  and  of  dimin- 
ishing the  risk  of  the  deposition  of  the  biurate,  it  is  advisable  to 
reduce  the  acidity  of  the  urine,  or  even  to  render  it  slightly  alkaline 
by  the  liberal  employment  of  vegetable  foods  and  the  occasional  use 
of  potassium  citrate  or  potassium  acetate.  Some  observers  recom- 
mend the  free  use  of  alkaline  mineral  waters.  On  theoretical 
grounds,  those  which  owe  their  alkalinity  to  the  presence  of  sodium 


SUBACUTE  AND  CHRONIC  GOUT.  555 

compounds  should  be  avoided,  as  they  might  possibly  favor  the  for- 
mation of  sodium  biurate. 

On  a  previous  page  reference  has  already  been  made  to  the  obser- 
vations of  Mordhorst  (see  Acute  Rheumatism),  who  considers  that 
gout  and  rheumatism  are  intimately  connected,  gout  depending  upon 
the  deposition  of  crystals  of  sodium  biurate,  while  rheumatism  is  due 
to  the  formation  of  granular  urates.  He  maintains  that  sodium  car- 
bonate and  bicarbonate,  although  they  do  not  directly  favor  the 
solution  of  crystalline  biurate,  indirectly  prevent  its  deposition  by 
encouraging  the  oxidation  of  uric  acid  as  it  is  formed,  and  he  recom- 
mends the  free  use  of  the  bicarbonate  in  the  form  of  mineral  waters 
containing  carbonic  acid  and  common  salt,  and  as  free  as  possible 
from  lime.  It  may  be  added  that  Mordhorst  believes  that  part  of 
the  uric  acid  formed  is  at  once  excreted  by  the  kidneys,  part  is  oxi- 
dized and  thus  destroyed,  and  part,  again,  may  be  held  back  and 
stored  in  the  tissues. 

The  chief  feature  in  the  dietary  of  those  with  gouty  tendencies  is 
the  avoidance  of  excess  of  any  kind.  The  diet  should  be  light  and 
easily  digested,  and  it  should  contain  only  a  small  proportion  of  pro- 
teid  matter,  whether  this  be  animal  or  vegetable.  Owing  to  the 
relatively  large  amount  of  proteid  material  it  contains,  meat  is  to  be 
taken  sparingly,  and  it  is  best  reserved  for  a  single  meal,  preferably 
luncheon  rather  than  dinner.  Green  vegetables  are  of  distinct  ad- 
vantage in  the  treatment  of  gout,  and  of  these  the  most  beneficial 
are  spinach  and  Brussels  sprouts.  The  former  may  be  obtained  at 
almost  any  time  of  the  year,  since  the  carefully  dried  spinach  does 
not  appear  to  lose  any  of  its  advantages  if  properly  cooked. 

While  encouraging  moderation,  it  is  not  advisable  to  reduce  the 
amount  of  food  to  such  an  extent  that  the  patient  always  has  a  sense 
of  hunger  and  craving.  By  judicious  management  and  by  frequent 
changes,  toleration  of  the  privations  can  be  established. 

The  chief  articles  which  have  to  be  avoided  are  alcoholic  drinks, 
more  particularly  those  which  contain  a  relatively  large  proportion 
of  sugar,  such  as  sweet  wines,  together  with  the  various  forms  of 
ales  or  stout. 

In  general  terms  it  may  be  stated  that  it  is  well  to  avoid  the  use 
of  sugar  in  any  form,  and  also  of  pastry  ;  both  of  these  are  apt  to 
disturb  digestion,  which  is  rarely  good  in  gouty  individuals.  For 
the  same  reason  it  is  advisable  to  forbid  the  use  of  salt  meats  and  of 
smoked  and  dried  fish.     The  rule  as  to  the  abstinence  from  alcohol 


556  CONSTITUTIONAL  DISEASES. 

must  sometimes  be  broken  when  the  circulation  is  weak  and  also  when 
the  appetite  and  digestion  in  old  people  appear  to  be  better  when  a 
moderate  supply  of  good  whiskey  well  diluted  is  administered  toward 
the  end  of  the  meal. 

It  must  be  admitted,  however,  that  it  is  impossible  to  lay  down 
any  definite  rule  for  the  diet  of  gouty  patients,  since  in  some  indi- 
viduals attacks  appear  to  be  warded  off  by  various  articles  which  in 
others  distinctly  favor  the  onset  of  an  acute  attack  ;  thus,  for  ex- 
ample, some  individuals  are  distinctly  more  free  from  pain  when 
taking  champagne — a  wine  which  commonly  favors  chronic  or  sub- 
acute attacks. 

In  general  it  is  well  to  encourage  habits  of  activity ;  moderate 
exercise  in  the  open  air  is  distinctly  of  advantage,  and  it  appears 
frequently  to  reduce  pain  and  to  some  extent  to  diminish  the  swell- 
ing around  the  joints.  Some  discretion,  however,  must  be  used  in 
the  form  of  exercise  recommended,  since  the  influence  of  gout  upon 
the  cardiac  walls  cannot  be  ignored.  Shortly  after  an  attack  of  acute 
gout,  passive  movements  and  massage  should  be  employed,  but  the 
greatest  tenderness  must  be  used  in  these  processes,  since  with  any 
undue  violence,  particularly  at  an  early  date,  there  is  strong  prob- 
ability of  inducing  further  deposits. 

When  the  joint  remains  swollen,  benefit  sometimes  results  from  the 
use  of  liniment  of  camphor,  or  of  potassium  iodide  with  soap  liniment. 

For  the  treatment  of  gouty  deposits  and  deformities  many  of  the 
foreign  thermal  springs  and  baths  have  been  recommended,  as,  for 
example,  Wildbad,  Gastein,  and  Aix-les-Bains ;  in  England,  Bath 
or  Buxton ;  or,  in  the  United  States,  the  Hot  Springs  of  Arkansas. 
Much  benefit  is  undoubtedly  due  to  warmth,  to  massage,  and  to  the 
passive  movements  which  are  employed  ;  but,  in  all  probability,  the 
warm  water  which  is  taken  internally  plays  a  large  part  in  the  relief 
of  the  symptoms,  acting  both  as  solvent  and  eliminant.  The  use  of 
baths  is  distinctly  contraindicated,  however,  during  an  acute  attack, 
and  also  at  all  times  for  those  patients  who  suffer  from  weakness  of 
the  circulation  or  who  are  enfeebled  by  age.  As  in  other  joint  affec- 
tions marked  by  thickening  and  immobility,  the  local  application  of 
hot  air,  as  in  the  Tallerman  or  Dowsing  process,  has  been  strongly 
recommended.  In  true  gout,  however,  this  treatment  appears  to  be 
of  less  service  than  in  rheumatoid  arthritis. 

Metastatic  Gout.  Metastatic  gout  is  a  form  which  occasionally 
follows  the  sudden  arrest  of  an  acute  attack  of  gout,  and  in  this 


IBBEGULAB  SYMPTOMS  REFERABLE  TO  GOUT.        557 

affection  the  symptoms  may  be  either  gastro-intestinal,  or  cardiac, 
or  cerebral.  The  gastro-intestinal  type  is  marked  by  vomiting, 
severe  abdominal  pain,  and  palpitation  ;  the  cardiac  by  pain  referred 
to  the  region  of  the  heart,  with  palpitation  and  tendency  to  fainting  ; 
the  cerebral  by  irregular  cerebral  symptoms,  of  which  the  most  im- 
portant are  those  connected  with  apoplexy  or  with  inflammation  of 
the  meninges.  Should  any  of  these  indications  follow  the  sudden 
arrest  of  an  acute  attack,  it  is,  as  a  rule,  desirable  to  attempt  to 
reproduce  the  articular  affection  by  hot  applications  over  the  joint 
which  was  originally  attacked,  the  action  being  sometimes  favored 
by  hot  mustard  and  water.  The  various  forms  of  metastatic  gout 
require  suitable  treatment.  Thus  the  gastro-intestinal  calls  for  the 
administration  of  gastric  sedatives,  such  as  hydrocyanic  acid  and 
salts  of  bismuth.  The  cardiac  form  requires  the  administration  of 
digitalis  or  strophanthus,  while  for  the  relief  of  angina,  amyl  nitrite 
may  be  given  as  an  inhalation,  or  the  solution  of  trinitrin  may  be 
employed  internally.  For  the  cerebral  symptoms  the  treatment 
must  depend  upon  their  nature.  With  indications  of  hemiplegia, 
or  of  inflammatory  action  in  the  meninges,  moderate  venesection 
may  be  performed,  or  leeches  may  be  applied  over  the  mastoid 
region  or  the  temples ;  and  in  the  cerebral  affection  it  is  also  fre- 
quently desirable  to  insure  the  free  evacuation  of  the  bowel,  either 
by  croton  oil  or  by  calomel,  if  the  patient  is  sufficiently  conscious 
for  the  latter  to  be  taken. 

The  Treatment  of  Irregular  Symptoms  Referable  to  Gout. 
In  gouty  individuals  numerous  symptoms  may  arise  which  are 
undoubtedly  referable  to  gout.  These  may  affect  (1)  the  alimentary 
tract,  (2)  the  air  passages  and  lungs,  (3)  the  heart  and  vessels,  (4) 
the  nervous  system,  (5)  the  genito-urinary  system,  and  (6)  the  skin, 
while  the  disease  is  undoubtedly  intimately  connected  with  glyco- 
suria and  diabetes.  Many  of  the  irregular  types  of  gout  must  be 
treated  on  general  principles,  though  the  form  of  gouty  dyspepsia, 
which  is  often  of  a  prolonged  and  obstinate  character,  may  be 
reduced  at  least  in  duration  if,  in  addition  to  the  ordinary  gastric 
sedatives,  some  distinct  treatment  for  gout  is  sunultaneously  adopted, 
as,  for  example,  the  administration  of  colchicum,  of  guaiacum,  or  of 
potassium  iodide.  Similarly  with  regard  to  the  asthmatic  and  bron- 
chitic  attacks,  although  expectorants  may  be  of  some  service,  the 
use  of  potassium  iodide  is  still  more  beneficial.  The  two  chief  car- 
diac symptoms  are  palpitation,  with  perhaps  irregular  action,  and  a 


558  CONSTITUTIONAL  DISEASES. 

tendency  to  anginal  attacks.  Both  entail  rest  and  the  use  of  a  mer- 
curial purgative,  followed  by  magnesium  sulphate.  The  irregularity, 
however,  calls  for  the  administration  of  digitalis,  and  strychnine ; 
in  some  cases  the  latter  drug  may  be  used  alone  when  there  is  much 
evidence  of  nervousness.  The  angina  attacks  may  to  some  extent 
be  controlled  by  nitroglycerin  and  amyl  nitrite,  but  in  general  they 
call  for  the  employment  of  potassium  iodide  in  fairly  large  dose. 
When  these  attacks  persist,  however,  it  is  well  to  employ  colchicum 
or  guaiacum.  Some  of  the  forms  of  gout  which  affect  the  nervous 
system,  such  as  migraine,  neuralgia,  neuritis,  and  sciatica,  will  re- 
quire separate  detailed  consideration,  since  in  some  instances  these 
nervous  symptoms  may  be  referable  to  other  conditions.  Notwith- 
standing the  intimate  connection  between  gout  and  a  gouty  kidney, 
it  is  in  these  cases  almost  impossible  to  influence  the  kidney  bene- 
ficially in  any  other  way  than  by  diminishing  the  frequency  with 
which  it  is  irritated  by  gouty  attacks. 

The  most  tiresome  of  all  skin  affections  connected  with  gout  is 
eczema.  This  often  recurs  annually,  and  in  old  people  the  condi- 
tion may  be  almost  always  present.  This  form  of  eczema  is  most 
common  upon  the  face  and  forehead,  in  the  flexures  of  the  joints, 
and  around  the  scrotum  and  prepuce,  or  the  vulva.  Frequently 
gouty  eczema  is  replaced  from  time  to  time  by  prurigo  and  pruritus, 
which  generally  affect  the  same  situations,  and  may  lead  to  much 
excoriation.  Even  when  the  skin  appears  to  be  perfectly  free  from 
irritation,  complaint  may  be  made  of  stabbing  or  pricking  pains, 
which  are  followed  by  intense  itching.  The  treatment  of  these  con- 
ditions involves  not  only  the  ordinary  local  applications  suitable  to 
eczema,  but  also  the  constitutional  treatment  required  by  gout.  It 
is  often  found  that  gouty  eczema  appears  to  originate  from  excesses 
in  diet  with  regard  not  only  to  alcohol  but  more  particularly  to  sugar. 
Abstinence  from  alcohol  and  a  non-saccharine  diet  are  essentials  in 
the  treatment  of  gouty  eczema.  Although,  in  general,  it  is  desirable 
to  avoid  much  moisture  over  eczematous  surfaces,  marked  benefit 
frequently  results  from  the  occasional  use  of  alkaline  or  of  bran 
baths,  and  the  bran  bath  may  be  rendered  more  pleasant  if  the  bran 
is  previously  impregnated  with  eucalyptus  oil  or  some  other  fragrant 
material.  Such  baths  may  be  employed  once  or  twice  a  week,  accord- 
ing to  the  extent  and  severity  of  the  eczema,  and  subsequently  the 
surface  should  be  lubricated  with  a  soothing  application,  such  as 
may  be  prepared  from  zinc  oxide  and  liquid  petroleum ;  this  may 


IBREOULAR  SYMPTOMS  REFERABLE  TO  GOUT.         559 

be  lightly  applied  over  the  irritated  surface  with  a  large  brush.  The 
pruritus  and  prurigo  may  be  controlled  to  some  extent  by  the  same 
applications,  although  in  severe  cases  greater  benefit  results  from  the 
employment  of  a  solution  consisting  of  laudanum,  the  solution  of 
lead  subacetate,  and  rose  water. 

Saline  purgatives  are  frequently  beneficial  in  this  form  of  eczema, 
which  is  certainly  rendered  worse  if,  through  mattention,  the  patient 
is  allowed  to  become  constipated. 

When  gouty  eczema  is  very  obstinate  it  may  frequently  be 
relieved  by  the  use  of  sulphur  waters,  which  may  be  taken  inter- 
nally as  well  as  used  as  baths.  With  this  object  many  individuals 
with  gout  resort  to  Harrogate,  Strathpeffer,  or  Llandrindod,  wliere 
the  sulphur  springs  are  cold,  or  they  go  to  Aix-les-Bains,  Aix-la- 
Chapelle,  Bagneres-de-Luchon,  and  other  spas,  where  the  water  is 
warm  or  hot.  In  the  United  States  patients  may  be  sent  to  the 
hot  or  cold  sulphur  springs  of  Virginia. 

Other  skin  affections — such  as  herpes,  psoriasis,  urticaria,  or  car- 
buncles— are  occasionally  found  in  connection  with  gout.  These 
conditions  rarely  call  for  local  treatment,  though  they  necessitate 
the  use  of  colchicum,  of  guaiacum,  or  of  alkalies,  and  also  the  occa- 
sional employment  of  magnesium  sulphate. 

With  regard  to  glycosuria  and  diabetes,  which  occur  with  gout, 
these  are,  as  a  rule,  rather  late  symptoms,  and  rarely  give  rise  to 
very  much  constitutional  disturbance,  though  they  may  both  favor 
the  onset  of  eczema  or  of  prurigo.  The  glycosuria  may  ordinarily 
be  readily  checked  by  modifications  of  diet,  which  indeed  are  also 
most  desirable  on  account  of  the  gout,  with  which  the  glycosuria  is 
associated.  This  symptom  frequently  occurs  in  old  people  in  whom 
it  is  somewhat  hazardous  to  enforce  any  great  change  in  their  ordi- 
nary dietary,  and  it  is  then  rarely  wise  to  adopt  the  strict  regimen 
necessitated  by  diabetes  when  it  arises  in  young  adults.  Usually  it 
is  sufficient  to  insist  on  discontinuance  of  sugar,  and  to  reduce  the 
amount  of  carbohydrates  taken,  rather  than  to  attempt  to  discon- 
tinue their  employment.  These  patients  often  do  well  when  allowed 
to  take  moderate  quantities  of  well-toasted  bread,  while  they  fail 
rapidly  if  bread  is  withheld  and  some  form  of  gluten  substituted. 
Direct  medicinal  treatment  is  rarely  required  to  influence  the  amount 
of  water  or  sugar  passed,  but  there  is  advantage  in  the  occasional  use  of 
some  mild  hepatic  stimulant,  such  as  a  mercurial  pill  with  euonymin, 
while  the  customary  treatment  for  chronic  gout  may  be  beneficial. 


560  CONSTITUTIONAL  DISEASES. 

There  is  one  symptom  in  connection  with  gout  which  scarcely 
belongs  to  any  of  the  above  headings,  but  is  one  which  is  familiar 
to  all  who  suffer  from  gout,  and  perhaps  still  more  obvious  to  their 
friends.  This  symptom  is  irritability  and  uncertain  bursts  of  temper 
on  slight  provocation.  This  symptom,  which  is  perhaps  most  com- 
monly seen  with  gouty  glycosuria,  may  often  be  controlled  by  the 
administration  of  from  10  to  20  grains,  or  more,  of  potassium  bro- 
mide with  the  same  proportions  of  potassium  bicarbonate.  The 
former  perhaps  renders  the  patient  less  sensible  to  external  irrita- 
tion, while  the  latter  to  some  extent  may  favor  the  removal  of  the 
underlying  cause. 

In  the  selection  of  the  various  mineral  waters  for  the  different 
forms  of  gout,  reference  to  the  following  table,  which  is  included 
in  Dr.  Luff's  book  on  Gout,  its  Pathology  and  Treatmemt,  will 
undoubtedly  be  of  service  : 

Object  of  taking  the  water.  The  waters  best  suited  for  the  purpose. 

Absorption  of  gouty  deposits  from  the       Aix-les-Bains,  Bath,  Burton,  Contrexe- 
joints  and  tissues.  ville,  Gastein,  Pfaefers,  Strathpeffer, 

Teplitz,  Vittel,  Wildbad. 
Treatment  of  gouty  dy^epsia.  Brides-les-Bains,  Carlsbad,  Ems,  Hom- 

burg,    Kissingen,   Neuenahr,    Royat, 
Vals,  Vichy,  Wiesbaden. 
Treatment  of  gouty  congestion  and  tor-        Baden-Baden,     Bourbonne,      Carlsbad, 
por  of  the  liver,  and  of  gastro-intesti-  Cheltenham,    Contrexeville,      Harro- 

nal  catarrh  and  torpor.  gate,    Homburg,    Kissingen,     Leam- 

ington,     Llandrindod,      Marienbad, 
Neuenahr,       Tarasp-Schuls,       Vals, 
Vichy,  Vittel,  Wiesbaden. 
Treatment   of  gouty  affections   of  the       Ems,  Koyat. 

respiratory  organs. 
Treatment  of  gouty  glycosuria  and  dia-        Carlsbad,      Contrexeville,      Kissingen, 
betes.  Leamington,     Llandrindod,    Marien- 

bad, Neuenahr,  Vals,  Vichy,  Vittel. 
Treatment  of  gouty  skin  affections.  Sulphur  waters  and  baths. 

Osteo-arthritis.  This  condition  has  received  various  names, 
though  the  above  is  perhaps  the  one  which  is  least  open  to  objec- 
tion. It  has  been  termed  rheumatic  gout,  even  though  its  connec- 
tion with  either  rheumatism  or  gout  appears  to  be  entirely  fallacious. 
It  is  also  known  as  arthritis  deformans,  from  the  characteristic  alter- 
ation in  the  shape  and  structure  of  the  affected  joints.  The  amount 
of  deformity  and  the  consequent  wasting  of  muscles  from  disuse  are 
very  marked  features  in  this  disease.     The  deformity  is  due,  prima- 


OSTEO-ARTHRITIS.  561 

rily,  to  the  formation  of  osteophytic  growths,  forming  additional 
margins  to  the  articular  surfaces.  As  these  develop  they  cause  dis- 
placement of  the  normal  axis  of  the  limb,  and  they  frequently  lead 
to  thickening  of  the  fibrous  structures  around  the  joints,  the  com- 
bined result  being  to  render  movement  painful  and  even  impossible 
in  advanced  cases. 

Even  before  the  formation  of  osteophytes  the  cartilage  wliich 
covers  the  ends  of  the  articular  surfaces  becomes  degenerated  and 
eroded,  and  the  ends  of  the  bones  become  somewhat  more  dense  and 
smooth  and  frequently  enlarged  independently  of  osteophytic  growths. 

The  condition  is  commonest  among  females,  and  it  assumes  its 
most  hopeless  type  when  it  occurs  during  adolescence  or  in  early 
middle  life.  One  feature  which  cannot  be  disregarded  in  connec- 
tion with  any  system  of  treatment  is  the  disturbance  of  rest  result- 
ing from  pain.  The  pain  of  osteo-arthritis  is  generally  worse  at 
night-time,  but  during  the  day  moderate  movements  are  likely,  even 
in  the  early  stages  of  the  malady,  to  lead  to  great  pain.  This  dis- 
turbance of  sleep  inevitably  causes  depression  of  the  general  health, 
with  loss  of  appetite,  which  lead  to  impaired  nutrition,  associated 
with  various  nervous  symptoms  which  greatly  increase  the  distress. 
Any  course  of  treatment,  therefore,  must  be  calculated  not  only  to 
relieve  pain,  but  also  to  secure  sleep  and  to  improve  the  general 
health,  for  it  is  generally  admitted  that  with  impaired  health  the 
progress  of  this  disease  is  more  rapid. 

The  connection  of  osteo-arthritis  with  various  forms  of  neuroses 
must  not  be  overlooked,  since  undoubtedly  there  must  be  an  inti- 
mate relation,  not  only  with  general  mental  disturbance,  such  as 
may  arise  in  connection  with  anxiety  or  sorrow,  but  also  with 
numerous  forms  of  uterine  or  ovarian  irregularities.  Although  the 
disease  ordinarily  affects  a  large  number  of  joints,  it  commonly  com- 
mences in  the  smaller  ones,  particularly  those  of  the  hands  and 
feet ;  but  in  advanced  cases  much  of  the  deformity  is  due  to  altera- 
tions in  the  shape  and  structure  of  the  knees  and  elbows.  Perhaps 
the  greatest  amount  of  pain  and  disturbance  of  health  arises  when 
the  temporo-maxillary  articulation  is  affected,  the  interference  with 
nutrition  and  with  sleep  being  very  severe,  since  every  movement 
causes  agonizing  pain.  Happily,  however,  this  joint  is  but  rarely 
affected. 

The  above  short  account  of  this  affection  indicates  its  essentially 
chronic  character  and  the  general  tendency  to  crippling  and  deform- 

36 


562  CONSTITUTIONAL  DISEASES. 

ity.  Some  observers  consider  that  the  disease  is  quite  incurable,  and, 
although  this  is  perhaps  too  sweeping  an  assertion,  it  is  certainly  not 
much  more  erroneous  than  the  sanguine  claims  that  have  been  put 
forth  on  behalf  of  various  special  modes  of  treatment.  Under  judi- 
cious management  the  disease  may,  in  a  certain  proportion  of  cases, 
be  arrested,  and  the  patient  may  gradually  become  accustomed  to 
the  altered  anatomical  forms,  and  may  lead  a  useful  life,  with  some 
impairment  of  movement. 

To  attain  this  result  it  is  above  all  necessary,  if  possible,  to  ascer- 
tain and  remove  the  cause ;  hence  it  is  essential  to  make  very  careful 
inquiry  as  to  the  possible  connection  of  the  disease  with  any  men- 
strual irregularity,  which  may  perhaps  be  corrected,  and  also  to 
treat  the  general  health  by  the  free  use  of  alterative  tonics.  AVith 
this  object  various  preparations  of  arsenic  are  frequently  employed, 
either  iron  arsenate  (yig-  to  \  grain)  or  the  sodium  arsenate  {-^-^  to 
To  g^'^i'^)?  these  being  most  conveniently  administered  as  a  pill  in 
conjunction  with  ferrous  sulphate,  if  there  is  marked  tendency  to 
ansemia.  This  pill  should,  of  course,  be  administered  after  meals ; 
if  the  patient  experiences  any  difficulty  in  taking  it,  the  sodium 
arsenate  may  be  given  in  solution,  with  iron  citrate,  or  with  the 
syrup  of  ferrous  iodide,  or,  if  the  digestion  appears  to  suffer  from 
the  use  of  arsenic,  the  syrup  of  ferrous  iodide,  |^  to  1  drachm,  may 
be  given  with  water  three  times  a  day.  Although  this  drug  is  fre- 
quently of  very  great  service,  complaint  is  sometimes  made  of  its 
somewhat  persistent  taste,  which  is  due  doubtless  to  the  absorption 
of  iodine  and  its  gradual  elimination  by  the  salivary  glands.  I 
have  known  instances  where  this  resulted  in  some  impairment  of 
appetite,  so  that  the  drug  had  to  be  discontinued,  even  though  the 
more  common  indications  of  iodism  had  not  been  produced. 

When  there  is  evening  rise  of  temperature,  together  with  some 
slight  night-sweats,  quinine  is  often  of  service.  A  grain  or  a  grain 
and  a  half  of  quinine  may  be  added  to  the  iron  arsenate,  or  it  may 
be  given  in  solution  together  with  diluted  sulphuric  acid,  or  in  pill 
form  with  extract  of  nux  vomica,  or  strychnine  hydrochlorate  and 
extract  of  belladonna.  Ordinarily,  under  this  treatment  the  appe- 
tite improves  and  temperature  falls. 

When  there  are  marked  indications  of  debility,  cod-liver  oil  may 
be  of  service.  Indeed,  many  observers  consider  that  they  obtain 
better  results  from  the  steady  employment  of  this  drug  than  from 
any  other  form  of  medication.     It  is  well  to  commence  the  admin- 


OSTEO-AETHRITIS.  563 

istration  with  small  doses,  given  after  meals  or  before  bedtime,  and 
gradually  to  increase  the  amount  as  toleration  becomes  established. 
Since,  however,  it  is  of  the  first  importance  not  to  interfere  with 
digestion,  care  must  be  taken  not  to  press  the  use  of  cod-liver  oil 
when  it  excites  great  repugnance. 

During  the  early  stages  of  the  disease  it  is  of  considerable  impor- 
tance to  counteract  the  tendency  to  constipation,  and  the  most  ser- 
viceable laxative  is  sulphur,  which  should  be  taken  in  comparatively 
large  doses.  The  confection  of  sulphur  (the  composition  of  which 
is  as  follows  :  sublimed  sulphur,  .5iv  ;  potassium  bitartrate,  5j ;  pow- 
dered tragacanth,  gr.  xviij ;  syrup,  §1]  ',  tincture  of  orange  peel,  5ss, 
and  glycerin,  Sjss)  may  be  administered  night  after  night ;  but  in 
general  it  is  found  that  preference  is  expressed  for  the  repeated  use 
of  the  sulphur  lozenge  (the  composition  of  which  is  as  follows  :  pre- 
cipitated sulphur,  gr.  v ;  potassium  bitartrate,  gr.  j ;  sugar,  gr.  viij  ; 
powdered  acacia,  gr.  j ;  tincture  of  orange  peel,  "ij ;  tincture  of 
acacia,  ^]),  two  or  three  of  which  should  be  taken  at  bedtime.  The 
compound  licorice  powder  is  perhaps  of  less  service,  since  the  laxa- 
tive action  is  to  some  extent  dependent  upon  senna,  and,  therefore, 
the  amount  of  sulphur  that  can  be  taken  conveniently  is  more  limited. 

The  local  treatment  is  perhaps  of  almost  equal  importance  with 
the  medicinal,  but  the  amount  of  benefit  that  results  cannot  be 
gauged  with  any  certainty.  At  the  present  time  reports  from  dif- 
ferent observers  are  somewhat  conflicting.  During  the  last  few 
years  much  has  been  said  of  the  value  of  hot,  dry  air  applied  locally, 
and  numerous  devices  have  been  provided  by  which  a  current  of 
hot  air  may  be  made  to  circulate  around  the  affected  limb.  This 
treatment  involves  the  use  of  a  special  form  of  apparatus,  such  as 
is  employed  in  the  Tallerman  treatment,  or  in  the  Phillips  patent 
hot-air  bath,  in  which  the  temperature  within  the  chamber  can  be 
raised  to  300°  or  350°  F.  The  part  to  which  the  heat  is  to  be 
applied  is  wrapped  in  lint  or  towels  and  placed  within  the  centre 
of  the  chamber,  supported  on  straps,  so  that  it  shall  not  come  into 
actual  contact  with  any  portion  of  the  walls.  The  stove  then 
being  lighted  the  temperature  of  the  chamber  rises  rapidly,  and 
the  hot,  dry  current  of  air  causes  no  discomfort  when  the  skin  per- 
spires freely.  Ordinarily  during  the  use  of  the  hot-air  bath  this 
result  speedily  follows,  and  the  patient's  temperature  may  even  rise 
slightly.  The  bath  is  usually  employed  for  an  hour  at  a  time,  and 
its  use  is  repeated  every  second  or  third  day. 


564  CONSTITUTIONAL  DISEASES. 

There  is  much  evidence  to  show  that  in  early  conditions  of  osteo- 
arthritis these  hot  applications  will  lead  to  increased  mobility ;  but 
in  advanced  cases,  when  there  is  much  destruction  of  tissue  or  much 
osteophytic  growth,  comparatively  little  benefit  ensues. 

Massage  is  another  form  of  treatment  that  has  given  rise  to  con- 
flicting statements.  In  some  instances,  when  the  loss  of  power  has 
resulted  from  disuse  on  account  of  pain,  massage  has  been  of  very 
great  service  after  the  stationary  stage  has  been  reached — that  is, 
the  massage  of  the  degenerated  muscles  has  caused  them  to  resume 
a  more  normal  tone  and  strength,  and  has  thus  enabled  movements 
once  more  to  be  effected.  Independently  of  this,  however,  massage, 
if  performed  with  care  and  moderation,  may  cause  some  improve- 
ment by  promoting  the  circulation  through  the  affected  joints,  and 
this  may  promote  the  absorption  of  inflammatory  thickenings, 
although  it  is  powerless  to  affect  osteophytic  growths  or  degenera- 
tion of  cartilage. 

The  combination  of  massage  with  the  use  of  hot  baths  is  now 
carried  out  at  many  of  the  hospitals  and  balneological  establish- 
ments, and  in  some  cases  with  considerable  benefit.  Many  patients 
go  to  Aix-les-Bains  with  this  object,  and  under  the  combined  influ- 
ence of  massage,  of  baths,  and  of  the  somewhat  hot  and  close  air  of 
the  valley  they  may  experience  some  relief.  At  Aix-les-Bains  the 
baths  are  warm,  and  the  massage  is  effected  by  a  couple  of  attend- 
ants during  the  flow  of  a  continuous  stream  of  warm  water  over 
the  part  upon  which  they  are  operating ;  after  the  bath  the  patient 
is  quickly  dried,  enveloped  in  blankets,  taken  back  to  the  hotel,  and 
allowed  to  sleep  for  an  hour  or  more. 

I  have  known  some  few  cases  of  osteo-arthritis  in  which  this  form 
of  treatment  has  given  surprisingly  beneficial  results,  but  I  have 
also  known  many  who  have  derived  no  advantage.  Even  wlien  it 
is  inconvenient  or  impossible  for  the  patient  to  undertake  the  journey 
to  Aix-les-Bains,  some  good  may  be  done  by  daily  sponging  the 
affected  limbs  with  warm  water,  and  by  subsequently  employing 
gentle  friction,  so  as  to  promote  circulation. 

As  m  many  other  conditions  leading  to  impaired  mobility  of  the 
limbs,  more  violent  measures  have  frequently  been  adopted,  such 
as  the  application  of  the  actual  cautery  or  of  Paquelin's  cautery. 
These,  by  promoting  counter-irritation,  may  occasionally  reduce  the 
inflammatory  thickening  and  may  establish  a  more  healthy  normal 
circulation  ;  but  in  the  large  majority  of  cases  the  use  of  the  cautery, 


OSTEO-ARTHRITIS.  565 

or  of  iodine,  or  of  blisters,  serves  no  good  purpose  when  the  disease 
has  reached  an  advanced  stage. 

Similarly,  the  employment  of  electric  currents  has  given  rise  to 
conflicting  statements.  The  benefit  that  arises  is  chiefly  seen  in  the 
early  stages  of  the  disease,  while  perhaps  the  improvement  is  to 
some  extent  due  to  the  restoration  of  muscular  tone.  But  in  a  dis- 
ease which  is  so  chronic  and,  as  a  rule,  so  hopeless,  these  and  other 
forms  of  stimulation  of  the  affected  part  will  necessarily  demand 
trial. 

In  the  early  stages,  when  the  hands  and  the  wrists  alone  are  in- 
volved, I  have  seen  much  benefit  follow  the  application  of  iodine, 
with  repeated  gentle,  passive  movement.  Similar  benefit  sometimes 
follows  the  application  of  various  stimulating  ointments  or  liniments, 
particularly  those  containing  iodine.  The  ointment  of  cadmium 
iodide,  which  was  formerly  official,  has  occasionally  appeared  to  give 
much  relief,  though  sometimes  it  has  caused  blistering.  Potassium 
iodide  with  soap  liniment  and  the  ointment  of  lead  iodide  are  per- 
haps more  frequently  used  when  objection  is  made  to  the  discolora- 
tion produced  by  the  liniments  with  iodine. 

In  conclusion,  it  may  once  more  be  emphatically  repeated  that, 
notwithstanding  the  occasional  value  of  any  of  the  above  local  meas- 
ures, it  is  of  the  highest  importance  to  pay  due  regard  to  the  con- 
stitutional condition  and  the  mental  depression  from  which  these 
patients  so  commonly  suffer.  Doubtless  a  large  part  of  the  benefit 
attributed  to  residence  at  Aix-les-Bains,  at  Gagatz,  or  at  Wildbad 
is  to  be  ascribed  to  the  cheering  influence  of  foreign  residence  in 
bright,  sunny  surroundings.  Any  form  of  treatment  that  ignores 
the  constitutional  condition  is  foredoomed  to  failure. 


CHAPTER    XXV. 

CONSTITUTIONAL   BmEASES—Contlnued. 
Rickets — Scurvy  —Purpura — Hsemophilia — Diabetes  Insipidus  —Diabetes  Mellitus. 

Rickets.  This  is  essentially  a  disease  of  early  childhood,  the 
chief  symptoms  commencing  gradually  about  the  time  of  dentition  ; 
but  the  results  of  the  disease,  apart  from  actual  deformity,  may  in- 
crease the  tendency  to  other  diseases  or  may  even  give  a  serious 
aspect  to  otherwise  simple  complaints.  The  conditions  under  which 
the  disease  arises  are  probably  not  the  same  for  every  case,  though, 
in  my  opinion,  for  the  great  majority  the  disease  undoubtedly  fre- 
quently takes  its  origin  in  the  too  early  employment  of  starchy 
foods  combined  with' deficient  use  of  milk,  whether  the  feeding  of 
the  infant  is  undertaken  by  the  mother  or  whether  the  child  is  being 
brought  up  by  hand.  Even  with  improper  diet,  however,  the  ten- 
dency to  the  disease  is  increased  very  greatly  by  imperfect  ventila- 
tion and  by  lack  of  direct  sunlight.  Children  who  live  in  poor 
districts  are  more  often  the  subjects  of  rickets  when  they  occupy 
rooms  below  the  level  of  the  ground. 

To  some  extent  syphilis  appears  to  promote  the  liability  to  this 
complaint,  but,  independently  of  any  evidence  of  hereditary  taint, 
the  tendency  is  increased  when  the  child  commences  life  in  an  im- 
poverished condition,  owing,  possibly,  to  maternal  illnesses  of  any 
kind  daring  the  pregnancy,  to  attempt  to  nurse  a  baby  during  the 
existence  of  pregnancy,  to  the  exhaustion  of  the  maternal  strength, 
due  to  an  abnormally  large  family  or  to  a  too  rapid  succession  of 
pregnancies. 

To  some  extent,  therefore,  this  disease  is  to  be  controlled  by  what 
has  been  aptly  termed  antenatal  therapeutics,  which  in  this  instance 
merely  means  the  adoption  of  measures  concerning  the  health  of  the 
mother  which  will  minimize  the  tendency  to  the  development  of 
rickets.  From  what  has  been  said,  this  would  involve  the  discon- 
tinuance of  nursing  so  soon  as  pregnancy  has  been  recognized,  and 
the  other  conditions  that  have  been  mentioned  should  entail  the 
employment  of  tonic  remedies,  of  an  increased  liberality  of  diet, 


RICKETS.  567 

and,  if  practicable,  open-air  exercise  and  modifications  of  work ;  in 
short,  the  measures  should  be  those  which  will,  so  far  as  possible, 
contribute  to  the  health  of  the  mother  and  thus  to  the  probable 
health  of  the  child. 

It  must  not  be  assumed,  however,  that  in  every  case  rickets  is 
dependent  upon  influences  impressed  upon  the  infant  prior  to  its 
birth,  since  even  when,  in  the  nursing  phraseology,  it  has  been  "  a 
fine  baby  born,"  it  may  subsequently  suffer  from  rickets  if  the 
mother  is  attempting  to  nurse  it  when  she  herself  is  in  an  imper- 
fect condition  of  health.  This  is  likely  to  favor  too  great  frequency 
of  nursing,  and  when  the  child  is  still  dissatisfied  it  will  almost  in- 
evitably lead  to  the  employment  of  some  additional  form  of  food, 
which  is  unfortunately  too  often  of  a  starchy  nature,  from  a  dread 
of  the  "  two  milks  disagreeing." 

Although  the  well  being  of  the  child  is  largely  dependent  on  the 
length  of  time  during  which  the  infant  can  receive  its  natural  mater- 
nal nourishment,  it  is  better,  when  it  does  not  thrive,  to  employ  some 
form  of  milk  alternately  with  the  maternal  nourishment  than  to 
resort  to  any  of  the  patent  starchy  foods  which  are  so  often  used 
with  or  without  milk.  If,  in  spite  of  this,  the  child  still  remains 
unsatisfied,  it  may  be  necessary  to  discontinue  the  maternal  supply 
entirely  and  to  have  recourse  either  to  a  wet-nurse,  or,  preferably, 
to  feeding  the  infant  entirely  upon  a  suitably  prepared  milk,  defer- 
ring the  use  of  any  form  of  starchy  food  until  some  teeth  have  made 
their  appearance.  By  the  adoption  of  this  principle  of  dietary  the 
liability  to  this  disease  may  often  be  warded  off,  especially  if  the 
infant  can  be  kept  under  hygienic  conditions  necessarily  involving 
an  abundance  of  fresh  air  and  the  utmost  regularity  and  tenderness 
of  treatment. 

In  spite  of  warnings,  however,  and  in  spite  of  repeated  advice, 
fundamental  errors  are  often  continued  until  the  child  is  brought 
up  for  treatment,  the  chief  cause  of  complaint  usually  being  undue 
restlessness  or  peevishness.  On  the  other  hand,  complaint  is  some- 
times made  that  the  child's  head  perspires  very  freely,  or,  with  older 
children,  who  are  able  to  sit  up,  it  may  be  asserted  that  the  back  is 
growing  out,  or  that  the  child  is  unduly  late  in  walking,  or  that  the 
teeth  are  very  late  in  appearing,  and  any  of  these  assertions  may 
furnish  an  indication  for  further  examination  of  the  child  and  for  the 
recognition  of  this  disease.  The  chief  characteristics  of  rickets  are 
enlargements  of  the  wrists  and  ankles,  enlargements  at  the  junctions 


568  CONSTITUTIONAL    DISEASES. 

of  the  ribs  with  the  costal  cartilages,  forming  the  well-known  rosary, 
an  abnormally  patent  fontanelle,  and,  in  extreme  cases,  a  dispropor- 
tion between  the  expanded  cranial  bones  and  the  small  facial  devel- 
opment. 

In  addition  to  the  above  characteristics,  the  tendency  to  repeated 
bronchial  attacks  may  be  noted  and  also  the  liability  to  attacks  of 
laryngismus  stridulus,  which  may  almost  be  regarded  as  a  compli- 
cation of  this  disease.  It  is  perhaps  scarcely  necessary  to  say  that 
the  maternal  theory  of  the  nature  of  the  complaint  should  never  be 
adopted  without  very  careful  examination  of  the  child  and  inquiry 
of  the  way  in  which  it  is  being  nourished ;  thus,  for  example,  it  is 
frequently  of  very  little  use  in  these  cases  to  treat  the  bronchial 
trouble  without  reference  to  rickets.  With  regard  to  feeding,  it 
will  often  be  found  that  the  use  of  milk  has  been  discontinued  too 
early,  owing  to  its  improper  administration,  and  it  must  be  remem- 
bered that  non-digestion  of  milk  and  impoverished  nutrition  may 
result  from  the  employment  of  milk  either  in  too  dilute  or  in  too 
concentrated  a  form.  When  given  too  diluted,  the  child  ordinarily 
fails  to  thrive,  and  accordingly  some  additional  nourishment  is  prob- 
ably employed  ;  on  the  other  hand,  if  given  unduly  concentrated, 
with  regard  to  the  age  of  the  child,  the  milk  is  extremely  apt  to  be 
rejected  as  undigested  curd,  and  again  impairment  of  nutrition  must 
ensue. 

For  the  first  few  weeks  of  life  the  milk  may  require  to  be  diluted 
with  from  two-tliirds  to  half  its  bulk  of  boiling  water,  and  to  this 
should  be  added  some  sugar  of  milk,  which  is  to  be  dissolved  in  the 
boiling  water  previously  to  its  addition  to  the  milk.  If  the  child 
thrives,  the  amount  of  milk  should  be  gradually  increased  until  by 
the  time  it  is  some  two  or  three  months  old  it  is  taking  two  parts  of 
milk  to  one  of  boiling  water,  and  at  the  fourth  or  fifth  month  the 
water  may  still  further  be  reduced  to  one-quarter  of  the  bulk  of  the 
milk. 

When  using  cow's  milk  it  is  commonly  advisable  to  add  sufficient 
lime  water  to  render  the  mixture  slightly  alkaline.  When  endeav- 
oring to  rear  a  rhachitic  child  in  this  way,  it  is  important  to  feed  it 
at  regular  intervals  of  from  two  and  a  half  to  three  hours,  according 
to  the  age  of  the  child,  the  shorter  period  being  commonly  adopted 
during  the  first  few  weeks  of  life.  Too  frequent  feeding  is  likely  to 
favor  vomiting  and  perhaps  diarrhoea,  conditions  which  may  often 
involve  various  modifications  of  diet,  such  as  the  employment  of 


RICKETS.  569 

humanized  milk  or  of  peptonized  milk,  or  even  a  discontinuance  of 
milk  and  the  substitution  of  some  form  of  meat  juice.  These  changes 
may  be  required  by  special  symptoms,  but  they  do  not  essentially 
belong  to  a  consideration  of  the  treatment  of  rickets,  and,  therefore, 
it  is  perhaps  unnecessary  to  enter  into  their  detailed  consideration 
here. 

The  treatment  of  this  disease  should  include  attention  to  the 
olothing  of  the  infant,  since  the  tendency  to  free  perspiration  will 
to  some  extent  induce  the  development  of  bronchial  trouble.  The 
clothing,  therefore,  should  be  warm  and  light,  and  a  broad  flannel 
binder  should  be  wrapped  around  the  abdomen.  The  liability  to 
chills  should  be  further  diminished  by  the  repeated  use  of  a  warm 
bath,  which  will  favor  a  more  healthy  condition  of  the  skin. 

In  addition,  the  importance  of  fresh  air  must  be  impressed  upon 
those  having  charge  of  the  infant.  Rhachitic  children,  when  warmly 
clad,  do  far  better  with  an  abundance  of  fresh  air,  although  the  ten- 
dency to  bronchial  troubles  naturally  leads  to  some  dread  of  exposure. 

The  form  of  medicinal  treatment  adopted  must  depend  upon  the 
age  of  the  child  and  upon  the  more  prominent  symptoms.  If  free 
from  diarrhoea,  great  advantage  will  be  found  in  the  use  of  cod-liver 
oil,  which  is,  as  a  rule,  readily  taken,  and,  except  in  hot  weather,  does 
not  commonly  favor  diarrhoea.  Although  the  nourishment  improves 
considerably  during  the  use  of  cod-liver  oil,  the  formation  of  bone 
frequently  requires  the  administration  of  other  remedies.  Children 
from  twelve  to  eighteen  months  old  improve  rapidly  when,  in  con- 
junction with  cod-liver  oil,  syrup  of  ferrous  phosphate  (British  Phar- 
macopoeia) is  given  twice  or  thrice  daily  in  J-drachm  doses  ;  while  if 
there  is  much  tendency  to  anaemia,  or  if  the  child  exhibits  a  marked 
lack  of  vitality,  great  benefit  may  ensue  from  the  administration  of 
J-drachm  doses  of  the  vinum  ferri  in  conjunction  with  the  same 
quantity  of  cod-liver  oil.  Although  there  may  be  no  history  and 
no  suspicion  of  syphilis,  greater  benefit  sometimes  results  from  sim- 
ilar doses  of  syrup  of  ferrous  iodide  ;  but  the  employment  of  this 
drug  demands  watchfulness,  since  it  is  sometimes  liable  to  interfere 
with  appetite,  owing  doubtless  to  the  elimination  of  iodine  by  the 
salivary  glands.  Other  forms  of  phosphates  have  frequently  been 
used  for  older  children,  and  the  administration  of  phosphorus  dis- 
solved in  olive  oil  has  even  been  recommended.  This  remedy,  how- 
ever, is  somewhat  difficult  to  employ,  and  it  appears  to  possess  no 
advantages  over  the  phosphates  or  hypophosphites. 


570  CONSTITUTIONAL  DISEASES. 

It  is  extremely  difficult  in  advanced  cases  of  rickets  to  avoid 
deformities ;  in  fact,  deformities,  such  as  bending  of  the  tibise  or  of 
the  forearms,  have  sometimes  developed  in  an  exaggerated  form  even 
before  advice  has  been  sought.  The  tendency  to  the  production  of 
deformities  is  frequently  favored  by  injudicious  attempts  to  hasten 
the  use  of  the  limbs  when  the  bones  are  still  in  a  weak,  pliant  con- 
dition. In  extreme  cases  of  rickets  it  is  advisable  to  keep  the  child 
entirely  in  the  recumbent  posture,  so  as  to  diminish  not  only  these 
deformities,  but  also  the  liability  to  curvature  of  the  spine,  with 
consequent  deformity  of  the  chest  wall — a  condition  Avhich  greatly 
adds  to  the  dangers  of  any  intercurrent  pulmonary  attack,  such  as 
bronchitis,  pneumonia,  or  whooping-cough.  Even  in  milder  cases 
it  is  not  advisable  that  the  child  should  be  encouraged  to  attempt  to 
walk  or  be  permitted  to  drag  itself  about  on  the  floor  resting  the 
greater  part  of  its  weight  on  its  wrists.  This  mode  of  progression 
frequently  precedes  walking  in  healthy  children,  and  then  does  no 
harm,  but  with  rhachitic  children  it  will  certainly  favor  the  produc- 
tion of  deformity. 

With  regard  to  special  symptoms  arising  in  the  course  of  the 
disease,  the  undue  perspiration  of  the  head  may  often  be  checked 
by  keeping  the  hair  short  and  by  occasionally  sponging  the  head 
with  dilute  acid  solutions  ;  but  this  symptom  is  one  which  involves 
no  risk,  and  merely  furnishes  an  indication  of  the  nature  of  the 
affection 

Reference  has  already  been  made  to  the  digestive  complications 
of  rickets.  Of  these,  vomiting  and  diarrhoea  are  perhaps  the  most 
important,  but  they  constitute  indications  rather  of  improper  feeding 
than  of  the  disease,  and  their  appropriate  treatment  has  already  been 
indicated  in  the  foregoing  pages.  Of  the  pulmonary  complications, 
bronchitis  is  perhaps  the  most  common,  and  although  it  may  call 
for  the  employment  of  expectorants,  it  is  usually  largely  controlled 
by  the  tonic  forms  of  treatment  adopted  for  rickets.  When  whoop- 
ing-cough develops  in  a  patient  with  a  markedly  rhachitic  chest, 
although  some  benefit  will  follow  from  the  use  of  cod-liver  oil  and 
other  tonic  remedies,  the  tendency  to  collapse  of  the  lung  and  the 
dangers  of  pneumonia  must  be  borne  in  mind.  In  many  of  these 
cases  it  is  necessary  to  employ  oxygen,  since  the  power  of  oxygena- 
tion is  greatly  reduced  by  the  difficulty  of  performing  efficient  move- 
ments of  the  thorax.  When  symptoms  of  laryngismus  stridulus  arise 
they  call  for  the  free  use  not  only  of  cod-liver  oil,  but  also  of  potas- 


SCURVY.  571 

sium  bromide,  the  combined  influence  of  these  drugs  commonly 
affording  far  greater  relief  than  when  either  of  them  is  used  singly, 
even  in  comparatively  large  doses. 

Scurvy.  Scurvy  has  been  comparatively  rarely  seen  since  its 
dependence  upon  unsuitable  food  with  the  absence  of  vegetable  acids 
has  been  recognized.  It  is  marked  by  great  debility  and  anaemia, 
and  the  prominent  symptoms  consist  of  a  spongy  condition  of  the 
gums,  with  a  great  liability  to  hemorrhage.  Formerly  it  frequently 
arose  among  sailors  and  others  whose  diet  was  defective,  and  it  is 
even  still  fairly  frequent  among  children  fed  upon  improper  forms 
of  food  who  are  the  subjects  of  rickets.  In  children  the  tendency 
to  hemorrhage  is  well  marked,  but  the  disease  is  mainly  character- 
ized by  the  alteration  of  the  gums  and  by  the  well-known  deform- 
ities of  rickets,  with  perhaps  some  oedema  of  the  extremities ;  in 
addition  to  hemorrhages  from  the  gums,  hsematuria  has  been  men- 
tioned as  a  frequent  symptom. 

The  treatment  of  scurvy  consists  primarily  in  the  correction  of 
errors  of  diet,  and  this  indication  is  readily  followed  in  children  ; 
but  it  is  somewhat  more  difficult  among  sailors  to  provide  for  the 
use  of  fresh  fruits  or  vegetables,  such  as  cabbage,  potatoes,  water- 
cress, and  lettuce,  which  should,  when  possible,  form  essential  con- 
stituents of  the  diet.  To  make  up  for  this  deficiency,  it  is  customary 
to  employ  fairly  large  doses  of  lemon  juice,  and  the  ships  in  the 
merchant  service  are  now  compelled  to  carry  lime  juice,  even  when 
it  is  possible  to  obtain  fresh  lemons.  The  juice  of  two  or  three 
lemons  should  be  used  daily  when  they  can  be  procured,  but,  in 
addition,  it  is  well  to  insure  the  use  of  a  varied  form  of  diet. 

The  above  measures  may  ordinarily  be  trusted  to  curtail  the  dura- 
tion of  scurvy,  but  special  symptoms  frequently  call  for  treatment. 
The  tenderness  of  the  gums  and  the  liability  to  hemorrhage  indicate 
the  advisability  of  employing  astringent  applications,  such  as  tinc- 
ture of  krameria.  This  may  be  used  alone  or  may  be  combined 
with  tincture  of  catechu.  In  the  milder  forms,  if  available,  the 
catechu  lozenge  is  of  some  service ;  but  it  is  usually  desirable  to 
employ  stronger  preparations,  to  diminish  the  pain  rapidly  and  also 
the  liability  to  hemorrhage. 

When  the  tenderness  continues  in  spite  of  these  remedies  the 
gums  may  be  touched  witli  silver  nitrate,  especially  if  ulcers  are 
found  on  the  gums  or  on  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  mouth. 
With  mild  forms  of  ulceration,  however,  the  astringent  action  of 


572  CONSTITUTIONAL  DISEASES. 

leniou  juice  is  often  of  considerable  service  for  its  local  as  well  as 
for  its  general  action. 

The  condition  of  the  gums  frequently  causes  considerable  fetor, 
for  the  relief  of  which  the  following  measures  are  indicated.  Dilute 
solutions  of  potassium  chlorate  may  be  employed  as  gargles  and  as 
mouth-washes,  and  this  drug  appears  to  possess  some  influence  to 
stimulate  healing,  in  addition  to  its  effect  in  controlling  the  fetor. 
The  official  solution  of  potassium  permanganate  is  also  frequently 
employed  with  the  same  object,  and  acts,  in  all  probability,  by  its 
power  of  arresting  the  development  of  organisms  upon  the  spongy 
gums.  When  the  fetor  is  peculiarly  unpleasant  and  resists  these 
milder  forms  of  treatment,  it  will  be  desirable  to  correct  it  by  in- 
halations of  chlorine  and  by  the  local  application  of  a  solution  of 
chlorine.  A  solution  of  iodine  is  often  used  instead  of  chlorine 
when  it  is  desired  to  produce  the  local  effects  within  the  mouth, 
and  it  has  the  advantage  of  being  somewhat  less  distasteful.  To 
some  extent  also  the  fetor  may  be  controlled  by  the  use  of  a  solu- 
tion of  alum,  which  is  in  addition  of  considerable  service  on  account 
of  its  astringent  action. 

Another  symptom  which  will  frequently  cause  much  discomfort 
is  the  reflex  salivation  resulting  from  the  tenderness  of  the  gums. 
When  this  leads  to  a  more  profuse  flow  of  saliva,  preparations  of 
belladonna  or  of  atropine  may  be  employed  internally  for  their 
special  action  on  the  salivary  glands.  Gastric  symptoms  may  also 
frequently  be  met  with  in  association  with  this  disease ;  they  may 
result  either  from  the  dietary,  which  has  formed  the  starting-point 
of  the  disease,  or  from  the  injudicious  employment  of  strong  astrin- 
gents. 

The  tendency  to  dyspeptic  symptoms  or  even  to  vomiting  indi- 
cates the  need  for  modifications  of  diet,  which  are  necessitated  also 
by  the  impossibility  of  mastication.  The  diet,  therefore,  in  severe 
cases  should  consist  largely  of  liquids,  strong  forms  of  soup  or  broth 
containing  well-boiled  vegetable  material  being  frequently  of  con- 
siderable service  ;  unless  the  boiling,  however,  has  been  very  efficient, 
'  straining  will  be  necessary  before  administration.  Should  the  gastric 
symptoms  afford  distinct  evidence  of  gastritis,  this  condition  must 
be  dealt  with  on  the  principles  already  indicated — that  is,  by  the 
administration  of  gastric  sedatives,  such  as  compounds  of  bismuth, 
together  with  small  quantities  of  opium  or  diluted  hydrocyanic 
acid. 


PURPURA.  573 

Apart  from  hemorrhage  of  the  gums,  it  is  comparatively  rare  to 
meet  with  hemorrhages  from  other  mucous  membranes.  Should 
these  arise,  however,  they  will  afford  indications  for  the  employ- 
ment of  extract  of  ergot,  hypodermatically  or  by  the  mouth,  and, 
as  in  various  forms  of  purpura,  the  administration  of  preparations 
of  hamamelis  may  also  be  required. 

During  convalescence  the  weakened  condition  of  the  patient  forms 
the  chief  cause  for  anxiety.  Various  tonics,  therefore,  more  particu- 
larly astringent  forms  of  iron,  will  be  of  service,  and  restoration  of 
strength  may  be  further  assisted  by  the  use  of  small  repeated  doses 
of  quinine.  When  the  weakness  is  very  severe  the  shrunken  con- 
dition of  the  muscles  will  render  a  course  of  massage  extremely 
desirable. 

Purpura.  Purpura  is  a  convenient  name  for  the  appearance  of 
extravasations  of  blood  into  the  skin.  Though  these  vary  greatly 
in  size,  they  are  all  when  first  formed  of  a  bright  red  color,  which 
subsequently  becomes  darker  and  gradually  fades.  These  extrava- 
sations are  characterized  by  their  persistence  under  pressure. 

Purpura  is  not  really  a  disease,  but  a  symptom  which  occurs  in 
the  course  of  numerous  diseases,  and  inasmuch  as  the  treatment 
must  necessarily  depend  upon  the  cause,  it  will  be  well  to  enumerate 
briefly  the  varieties  of  purpura.  It  occurs  in  three  distinct  forms 
— symptomatic,  arthritic,  and  hemorrhagic. 

The  symptomatic  may  be  divided  as  follows  : 

A.  Infectious,  as,  for  example,  in  connection  with  pyaemia,  sep- 
ticaemia, and  malignant  endocarditis.  The  rashes  of  some  specific 
fevers — such  as  measles,  scarlet  fever,  and  smallpox — may  be  asso- 
ciated with  a  purpuric  rash. 

B.  Toxic.  This  form  may  result  from  the  use  of  various  medi- 
cines, such  as  iodides,  mercury,  ergot,  belladonna,  and,  more  rarely, 
quinine.  The  well-known  copaiba  rash  must  also  be  included  in 
this  series.  Toxic  purpura  may  also  follow  after  snake-bites  and 
jaundice. 

C  Cachectic.  This  is  the  most  common  variety  of  purpura,  and 
may  occur  during  the  course  of  any  prolonged  wasting  disease,  as 
in  advanced  cases  of  carcinoma,  tuberculosis,  and  Bright' s  disease. 
It  is  more  frequently  developed  among  patients  who  are,  in  addition, 
weakened  by  age  ;  but  even  in  infaiits  the  bright  purpuric  spots  may 
result  from  malnutrition,  especially  if  associated  with  severe  diarrhoea. 

D.  Mechanical.     In  this  class  the  extravasations  are  merely  due 


574  CONSTITUTIONAL  DISEASES. 

to  temporary  over-distention  of  the  vessels,  as,  for  example,  during 
the  course  of  whooping-cough  or  of  epilepsy. 

E.  Neurotic,  This  form  may  be  associated  with  different  varieties 
of  myelitis,  and  also  with  hysteria  in  some  rare  but  Avell-marked 
instances. 

The  arthritic  form  of  purpura  is  most  commonly  believed  to  be 
of  rheumatic  type.  Different  varieties  of  arthritic  purpura  have 
been  described  under  the  names  of  purpura  simplex  and  peliosis 
rheumatica,  the  latter  also  furnishing  occasional  examples  of  pur- 
pura urticans  and  of  pemphigoid  purpura. 

Purpura  hemorrhagica  is  characterized  by  hemorrhages  from  the 
mucous  membranes,  and  includes  the  most  severe  type  of  this  condi- 
tion, since  both  the  cutaneous  hemorrhages  and  those  from  the  mucous 
membranes  may  be  very  extreme,  and  indeed  may  cause  death. 

With  regard  to  the  treatment,  from  what  has  been  said  this  must 
differ  greatly,  both  with  the  cause  and  with  the  severity  of  the  affec- 
tion. In  the  mildest  forms  it  is  not  essential  that  the  patient  should 
be  kept  in  bed,  unless  this  is  necessitated  by  the  associated  disease ; 
but,  on  the  other  hand,  with  hemorrhagic  forms,  and  frequently  when 
the  purpuric  eruption  is  largely  developed,  it  will  be  safer  to  keep 
the  patient  in  bed  and  to  see  that  the  clothing  is  moderately  warm. 

Similarly,  the  dietary  of  the  patient  will  only  require  special  modi- 
fications if  the  condition  is  characterized  by  tendency  to  hemorrhages 
from  mucous  membranes,  when  the  diet  should  be  nutritious  and 
readily  digested.  When  hemorrhages  have  already  occurred  it  will 
be  advisable  to  employ  a  liquid  diet,  but  when  the  purpura  arises  in 
connection  with  extreme  weakness  the  diet  must  be  adapted  to  meet 
this  indication.  In  hemorrhagic  cases  it  is  advisable  that  the  liquid 
should  be  cold,  as  the  tendency  to  hemorrhage  may,  to  some  extent, 
be  diminished  by  the  repeated  use  of  iced  drinks.  In  these  cases, 
also,  it  will  be  well  to  employ  opium  somewhat  freely,  unless  the 
age  of  the  patient  contraindicates  its  use.  In  adults  opium  serves 
to  quiet  the  movements  of  the  stomach  and  intestine,  and,  therefore, 
diminishes  the  risks  of  further  hemorrhage. 

The  condition  of  the  intestine  always  demands  attention,  even  in 
the  simpler  forms  of  purpura,  since  it  is  essential  to  avoid  both  con- 
stipation and  diarrhoea,  and,  accordingly,  suitable  remedies  must  be 
employed  when  specially  indicated. 

In  dealing  with  purpura  it  should  be  remembered  that  greater 
benefit  results  from  the  adoption  of  remedies  calculated  to  improve 


HEMOPHILIA.  575 

the  general  condition  of  the  health  than  from  those  special  drugs 
intended  to  control  farther  hemorrhage.  It  is  frequently  recom- 
mended that  strychnine  and  quinine  should  be  reserved  for  conva- 
lescence, but  they  appear  to  be  very  beneficial  at  almost  every  stage 
of  this  condition,  and  to  afford  greater  prospects  of  improvement 
than  can  be  obtained  from  the  use  of  the  various  astringents.  Ex- 
ception must  perhaps  be  made  in  favor  of  arsenic,  which  can  be 
administered  with  advantage  in  conjunction  with  some  form  of 
iron ;  but,  although  the  latter  remedy  certainly  possesses  astringent 
properties,  the  tonic  influence  of  arsenic  is  probably  of  greater  ser- 
vice under  these  circumstances. 

Various  astringents  are,  however,  frequently  used,  as,  for  example, 
diluted  sulphuric  acid  or  aromatic  sulphuric  acid.  If  desired  these 
may  be  combined  with  quinine.  Lead  acetate  is  another  astringent 
that  is  often  of  especial  service  in  purpura  with  intestinal  hemor- 
rhage ;  it  can  conveniently  be  combined  with  opium  in  pill  form. 
Tannic  acid  and  gallic  acid  are  also  used  in  hemorrhage  either  from 
the  stomach  or  intestine,  but  there  is  some  fear  lest  they  should 
produce  considerable  troublesome  gastritis  if  employed  too  liberally. 

Ergot  and  turpentine  have  both  been  recommended  under  similar 
circumstances.  The  former  may  be  injected  subcutaneously  to  con- 
trol gastric  or  intestinal  hemorrhage.  The  latter  may  be  adminis- 
tered in  small  doses  insufficient  to  produce  purgation.  Tincture  of 
hamamelis  has  recently  been  strongly  recommended  under  similar 
conditions,  and  although  it  appears  to  have  some  power  of  control- 
ling intestinal  or  gastric  hemorrhage,  it  possesses  very  little  influence 
on  the  cutaneous  hemorrhages. 

It  is  obvious  that  when  the  origin  of  the  disease  can  distinctly  be 
traced  to  the  use  of  some  medicinal  remedy,  this  should  be  discon- 
tinued. 

In  conclusion,  it  may  be  well  to  repeat  that  the  various  astrin- 
gents or  haemostatics  are  only  called  for  when  there  is  hemorrhage 
from  one  or  other  of  the  mucous  surfaces,  and  that  this  class  of 
remedies  is  of  no  value  in  preventing  the  development  of  further 
crops  of  petechise.  For  the  arrest  of  cutaneous  hemorrhages  it  is 
far  better  to  trust  to  the  employment  of  tonic  remedies  and  of 
hygienic  measures. 

Haemophilia.  This  affection,  like  the  foregoing,  is  characterized 
by  tendency  to  hemorrhage,  but  the  loss  of  blood  may  occur  spon- 
taneously or  may  result  from  trifling  causes  or  injuries.     It  further 


576  CONSTITUTIONAL  DISEASES. 

differs  from  purpura  in  the  frequency  with  which  it  is  associated 
with  arthritic  changes,  but  the  principal  point  of  distinction  lies  in 
its  hereditary  character,  and  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  disease 
is  most  commonly  transmitted  through  the  mother. 

Since  the  chief  characteristic  of  hsemophilia  is  the  occurrence  of 
severe,  and  perhaps  uncontrollable,  hemorrhage  after  trifling  injuries, 
the  recognition  of  this  tendency  to  bleeding  calls  for  the  utmost 
protective  care  and  for  the  avoidance  of  even  the  mildest  surgical 
operation,  so  far  as  practicable.  Even  after  such  mild  operations 
as  the  extraction  of  teeth  very  persistent  hemorrhage  may  occur.  I 
have  known  a  young  man  to  continue  to  bleed  for  upward  of  twenty- 
four  hours  after  the  removal  of  a  bicuspid  tooth,  the  loss  of  blood 
being  sufficient  to  cause  fainting. 

The  first  essential  in  treatment,  should  hemorrhage  arise,  is  the 
adoption  of  the  recumbent  posture  and  the  attempt  to  control  the 
bleeding  either  by  direct  compression  or  by  the  application  of  various 
styptics.  The  treatment  must  to  a  great  extent  depend  upon  the  site 
from  which  the  hemorrhage  is  proceeding ;  thus,  if  it  arises  from 
the  gums,  it  may  perhaps  be  controlled  by  the  application  of  ice, 
though  this  is  extremely  likely  to  cause  considerable  pain,  or  by  the 
use  of  tannic  or  gallic  acid,  with  which  the  cavity  may  be  plugged. 
Frequently,  however,  greater  advantage  results  from  the  employment 
of  some  liquid  form  of  astringent ;  thus  the  cavity  may  be  plugged 
with  a  little  pledget  of  cotton-wool,  which  has  previously  been  soaked 
in  a  solution  of  ferric  subsulpliate.  The  astringent  effect  of  this  drug, 
combined  with  pressure,  may  suffice  to  control  the  hemorrhage ;  but 
I  have  known  the  hemorrhage  to  recur  so  soon  as  the  plug  of  cotton- 
wool was  removed,  and  in  one  such  case,  when  other  astringents  had 
failed,  the  bleeding  was  ultimately  arrested  by  the  action  of  brandy, 
which  was  held  in  the  mouth  over  the  bleeding  site  without  the  in- 
tervention of  cotton- wool.  The  value  of  alcohol  in  the  arrest  of 
hemorrhage  should  be  borne  in  mind,  and  this  remedy  has  the  fur- 
ther advantage  of  serving  to  counteract  to  some  extent  the  cardiac 
weakness  which  may  result  from  much  loss  of  blood. 

Epistaxis  is  another  frequent  form  of  hemorrhage  in  hsemophilia, 
and  it  may  ensue  in  children  after  extremely  slight  injuries.  This 
condition  is  sometimes  relieved  by  the  application  of  ice  over  the 
forehead,  tlie  nose,  or  the  nape  of  the  neck ;  but  it  frequently  calls 
for  the  insufflation  of  tannic  acid,  gallic  acid,  or  dried  alum  ;  should 
the  hemorrhage  continue  in  spite  of  these  remedies,  it  may  be  neces- 


DIABETES  INSIPIDUS.  577 

saiy  to  plug  the  anterior  nares.  It  is,  however,  advisable  to  defer 
this  operation  if  possible,  since  hemorrhage  is  likely  to  start  afresh 
as  soon  as  the  plug  is  removed.  In  epistaxis  the  value  of  the  recum- 
bent posture  is  very  marked.  Indeed,  it  is  often  found  that  epistaxis 
only  recommences  when  the  patient  attempts  to  sit  up. 

Constitutional  treatment  is  generally  required  during  an  attack  of 
hsemophilia.  Various  forms  of  iron  or  of  arsenic  may  be  used  for 
their  tonic  influence,  and  the  former  has  even  been  credited  with  the 
power  of  controlling  hemorrhage  to  some  extent.  Recently,  how- 
ever, calcium  chloride  has  been  given  internally  to  increase  the  coag- 
ulability of  the  blood,  and  as  much  as  20  grains  have  been  given 
every  four  hours. 

Those  who  suffer  from  hsemophilia  frequently  complain  of  pain 
connected  with  the  larger  joints.  These  pains  generally  have  their 
origin  in  some  slight  injury,  and  they  are  commonly  associated  with 
some  enlargement  of  the  joint,  and  apparently  with  some  effusion 
into  the  synovial  cavity.  This  effusion,  in  all  probability,  is  hemor- 
rhagic. The  pains  of  haemophilia  are  often  ascribed  to  rheumatism  -, 
but  the  antirheumatic  treatment  is  absolutely  powerless  to  control 
this  form  of  arthritic  pain,  and  when  severe,  the  best  results  are  to 
be  obtained  by  checking  all  movements  of  the  limb  with  a  splint. 
For  the  elbow  the  employment  of  a  splint  of  angular  shape,  of  which 
the  angle  may  be  changed  from  time  to  time,  has,  in  my  experience, 
sufficed  to  enable  a  hsemophilic  patient  to  continue  his  ordinary  voca- 
tions, even  though  the  joint  was  considerably  enlarged.  Occasion- 
ally still  further  relief  may  be  obtained  from  the  use  of  evaporating 
lotions,  but  the  first  essential  is  the  fixation  of  the  limb. 

In  conclusion,  it  may  be  mentioned  that  the  loss  of  blood  by  hem- 
orrhage has  sometimes  led  to  the  employment  of  transfusion,  but  this 
operation  has  proved  of  very  little  service,  and  its  performance  has 
in  some  cases  led  to  increased  difficulty  in  controlling  the  bleeding 
at  the  site  of  operation.  Since  the  hemorrhage  of  haemophilia  has 
been  found  to  stop  when  fainting  has  been  produced,  this  occurrence 
has  sometimes  been  hastened  intentionally  by  venesection ;  but  this 
operation  is  also  not  to  be  recommended,  since,  although  it  may 
cause  speedy  fainting,  it  supplies  a  fresh  site  from  which  hemor- 
rhage may  recur  when  the  circulation  regains  power. 

Diabetes  Insipidus.  This  curious  disease  is  marked  by  the  pas- 
sage of  immense  quantities  of  urine  of  very  low  specific  gravity. 
The  urine  is  generally  free  from  abnormalities,  although  traces  of 

37 


578  CONSTITUTIONAL  DISEASES. 

sugar  are  occasionally  to  be  found,  and  still  more  rarely  albumin 
may  be  present.  The  condition  is  most  frequent  in  connection  with 
various  nervous  influences,  though,  as  a  rule,  it  does  not  appear  that 
any  distinct  lesion  is  present,  and  indeed  in  the  majority  of  cases  no 
lesion  can  be  found. 

The  symptoms  may  ensue  after  some  injury  or  nerve  shock,  but  in 
general  the  onset  is  gradual.  The  prominent  symptoms  are  merely  in- 
creased flow  of  urine,  with  thirst,  and  following  this  abnormal  drain- 
age of  fluid  from  the  system  the  skin  is  usually  dry  and  harsh,  and 
perspiration  is  excited  with  difficulty.  This  copious  drainage  of  fluid 
does  not  appear  to  influence  the  general  health  to  any  great  extent, 
though  symptoms  dependent  upon  a  nervous  cause  may  be  present. 
Sometimes  there  may  be  considerable  wasting,  but  ordinarily  the 
appetite  remains  good,  though  not  excessive,  and  the  digestion 
scarcely  suffers  at  all. 

As  the  thirst  and  the  increased  excretion  cause  discomfort  these 
symptoms  call  for  treatment,  which  it  must  be  admitted  is  usually 
by  no  means  satisfactory,  since,  although  some  degree  of  success  has 
Ibeen  claimed  for  various  remedies,  these  remedies  are  not  invariably 
'of  service,  and  some  cases  appear  to  be  cured  spontaneously,  inde- 
pendently of  any  form  of  treatment.  Remembering  the  probability 
of  the  neurotic  character  of  this  disease,  it  is  in  general  well  to  attempt 
to  treat  it  through  the  nervous  system.  Modifications  of  diet  do  not 
appear  to  have  any  influence  whatever,  and  although  it  is  possible 
to  reduce  the  amount  of  urine  by  diminishing  the  amount  of  liquid 
taken,  this  is  ordinarily  followed  by  so  much  distressing  thirst  that 
it  is  inexpedient  to  persist  in  this  treatment.  The  drugs  also,  such 
as  opium,  morphine,  and  codeine,  which  in  diabetes  mellitus  are  so 
often  found  to  diminish  the  urinary  secretion,  are  of  no  service  in 
this  affection,  and  perhaps  the  greatest  amount  of  success  appears  to 
have  followed  the  administration  of  preparations  of  valerian.  The 
ammoniated  tincture  of  valerian  may  be  given,  in  doses  of  from  J 
to  1  fluidrachm,  but,  on  account  of  the  unpleasant  taste  and  dis- 
agreeable odor,  many  patients  prefer  to  take  the  zinc  valerianate, 
which  can  be  best  prescribed  in  doses  of  from  1  to  3  grains  in  pill 
form,  since  this  salt  is  not  only  sparingly  soluble,  but  is  incompatible 
with  many  metallic  salts  and  with  most  vegetable  astrmgents.  When 
the  doses  above  mentioned  do  not  appear  to  be  followed  by  any  bene- 
ficial results,  the  amount  of  both  the  tincture  of  valerian  and  of  the 
zinc  valerianate  should  be  increased  gradually.     Osier  recommends 


DIABETES  MELLITUS.  579 

that  the  dose  of  the  latter  should  be  raised  by  degrees  to  15  and 
even  to  30  grains  three  times  a  day. 

With  the  object  of  allaying  undue  sensibility  of  the  nervous  sys- 
tem, preparations  of  belladonna  have  been  recommended,  and  these 
may  similarly  be  pushed  until  distinct  physiological  symptoms  are 
produced.  The  range  of  dose  is,  however,  much  more  limited  with 
belladonna  than  with  the  zinc  valerianate,  and  since  this  drug  will 
produce  dryness  of  the  throat  when  employed  in  overdoses  it  is  very 
liable  to  increase  the  patient's  discomfort. 

Upon  somewhat  theoretical  grounds  ergot  and  ergotin  have  been 
recommended,  in  the  hope  that  they  would  be  able  to  control  the 
calibre  of  the  renal  vessels,  and  thus  diminish  the  renal  excretion. 
Among  other  drugs  that  have  been  mentioned  are  the  following  : 
turpentine,  antipyrine,  strychnine,  and  arsenic.  Good  results  have 
also  been  claimed  for  the  administration  of  potassium  or  ammonium 
bromide,  and  in  idiopathic  cases  marked  by  an  abnormal  sensibility 
of  the  nervous  system  these  drugs  appear  to  be  indicated  rather  than 
nervine  tonics,  such  as  arsenic  or  strychnine.  Red  mercuric  iodide 
and  potassium  iodide  have  also  been  employed  with,  it  is  said,  some 
degree  of  success.  The  application  of  a  continuous  current  may 
often,  however,  be  still  more  beneficial ;  the  poles  should  be  placed 
respectively  either  over  the  loins  and  the  nape  of  the  neck,  or  one 
over  the  loins  and  the  other  over  the  front  of  the  abdomen.  It  is 
said  that  the  constant  current,  employed  in  the  latter  way,  to  the 
right  and  left  kidney  on  alternate  days  has  been  frequently  of  con- 
siderable service.  When  the  constitutional  condition  appears  to  be 
failing,  benefit  may  result  from  a  sea  voyage,  from  residence  at  the 
seaside,  and  from  other  hygienic  measures.  On  account  of  the  con- 
tinuous drain  of  fluid  it  is  commonly  advisable  to  employ  warm 
clothing  and  to  guard  against  sudden  chills,  while  the  general  health 
should  be  maintained  by  a  liberal  diet,  and,  if  necessary,  by  the 
administration  of  cod-liver  oil. 

Diabetes  Mellitus.  Diabetes  mellitus  is  marked  by  an  abnormal 
formation  of  sugar  within  the  system  and  by  its  excretion  in  the 
urine.  The  amount  of  urine  that  is  passed  is  very  commonly  in- 
creased with  diabetes  mellitus,  and  this  increase  may  sometimes  be 
very  considerable,  though  at  other  times  it  is  scarcely  sufficient  to 
attract  attention,  and  the  disease  is  only  recognized  by  the  occur- 
rence of  other  symptoms.  Prominent  among  the  latter  are  increas- 
ing lassitude  and  sense  of  fatigue,  increasing  irritability  and  nervous- 


580  CONSTITUTIONAL  DISEASES. 

ness,  together  with  some  slight  lumbar  pain.  Frequently,  also,  there 
will  be  excessive  appetite,  and  the  excretion  of  sugar  may  be  asso- 
ciated with  irritation  about  the  genital  organs  or  even  with  eczema. 
In  the  course  of  the  disease  other  symptoms  mayjdevelop  which  will 
be  noted  hereafter. 

The  addition  of  sugar  to  the  urine  is  invariably  associated  with 
a  great  increase  in  the  specific  gravity,  though  the  specific  gravity  is 
liable  to  considerable  alterations  according  to  the  amount  of  urine 
that  is  passed.  Even  when  the  amount  of  urine  is  greatly  increased 
the  specific  gravity  is  still  commonly  much  above  the  normal,  while 
in  those  cases  in  which  there  is  but  little  change  in  the  amount  of  the 
urine  the  specific  gravity  may  rise  to  1040  or  more.  The  alteration 
in  the  specific  gravity  of  the  urine  is  an  indication  of  the  amount 
of  sugar  that  is  being  passed,  but  in  estimating  the  results  of  any 
course  of  treatment  it  is  important  to  measure  accurately  the  daily 
quantity  of  water  passed  as  well  as  to  take  the  specific  gravity  of  a 
twenty-four-hour  specimen.  The  specific  gravity  will  vary  con- 
siderably during  the  day,  according  to  the  diet  and  according  to  the 
amount  of  liquid  consumed,  and  isolated  observations  are,  therefore, 
liable  to  lead  to  erroneous  inferences. 

Diabetes  mellitus  occurs  in  two  principal  forms  :  the  first  is  met 
with  among  children  and  young  adults,  or  even  during  middle  life ; 
the  second  is  met  with  in  old  age.  Of  the  two  forms  the  first  is  by 
far  the  more  important,  and  its  treatment  has  to  be  conducted  with 
the  most  rigid  observance  of  the  needful  alterations  in  dietary.  In 
old  age,  on  the  contrary,  a  fairly  large  amount  of  sugar  may  be 
passed  without  any  very  great  interference  with  the  general  nutri- 
tion, and  indeed  it  is  often  found  that  nutrition  suffers  far  more 
from  injudicious  severity  in  rules  of  diet  than  from  allowing  the 
dietary  to  remain  unaltered.  In  considering  the  treatment  of  this 
disease,  therefore,  it  is  necessary  to  speak  of  the  dietetic  and  of  the 
medicinal  treatment,  as  well  as  to  indicate  modifications  necessitated 
by  the  special  conditions  of  the  individual.  Moreover,  it  will  be 
necessary  to  add  a  short  consideration  of  the  treatment  of  special 
symptoms  which  may  arise  in  the  course  of  the  disease. 

With  regard  to  the  dietetic  treatment  of  young  adults,  it  is  need- 
ful to  eliminate  from  the  diet  all  articles  which  will  favor  the  forma- 
tion of  sugar  within  the  body,  and  it  is,  therefore,  advisable  to  supply 
the  patients  with  a  diet  table  indicating  not  only  the  articles  which 
must  be  avoided,  but  also  those  which  may  be  taken.    Many  patients, 


DIABETES  MELLITUS.  581 

if  merely  supplied  with  a  list  of  articles  to  avoid,  are  apt  to  consider 
that  the  treatment  is  intolerable,  since  so  many  familiar  articles  of 
daily  consumption  must  be  eliminated ;  on  the  other  hand,  if  care  is 
taken  in  the  construction  of  the  list  of  articles  which  diabetic  patients 
may  take — and  if,  moreover,  this  list  shows  also  the  articles  that 
may  be  taken  at  the  various  meals — the  sense  of  limitation  is  con- 
siderably reduced,  and  it  is  usually  easy  to  secure  sufficient  variety 
to  encourage  the  patient  to  persist  in  the  treatment. 

The  chief  difficulty  in  the  construction  of  the  dietary  lies  in  the 
elimination  of  bread.  Nearly  all  physicians  are  agreed  that  it  is 
desirable  to  avoid  the  use  of  ordinary  wheaten  bread  or  of  biscuits 
made  with  ordinary  flour,  and,  in  spite  of  the  numerous  substitutes 
that  have  been  suggested,  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  find  anything 
that  will  take  the  place  of  bread.  The  object  is  to  find  some  article 
which  may  be  eaten  with  the  meals  in  the  same  way  in  which  bread 
is  commonly  taken.  This  article  must  be  one  which  will  satisfy  the 
craving  for  bread  and  yet  will  not  contribute  to  the  formation  of 
sugar — in  other  words,  it  must  be  composed  of  some  substance 
devoid  of  starch  or  sugar.  The  substitutes  ordinarily  employed 
consist  of  various  forms  of  gluten  or  of  bran  bread  and  of  almond 
or  cocoanut  biscuits. 

A  form  of  gluten  bread  has  been  prepared  by  Van  Abbott,  and 
this  is  fairly  palatable  and  is  readily  taken  with  butter,  though  it 
demands  some  resolution  to  overcome  the  difficulty  of  mastication. 
Blatchley  supplies  cakes  for  diabetics,  composed  of  bran  and  prepared 
with  eggs,  milk,  and  butter  ;  while  Bonthron  also  prepares  a  form 
of  gluten  bread  Avhich  is  fairly  satisfactory.  There  is  really  no 
difficulty  in  supplying  a  substitute  for  bread  for  patients  of  fairly 
good  position  ;  the  difficulty  lies  in  procuring  some  inexpensive  sub- 
stitute for  the  poorer  classes.  Whitla  recommends  a  form  of  home- 
made bread  which  poor  people  suffering  from  diabetes  may  prepare 
for  themselves  from  the  crude  gluten  obtainable  from  starch  works. 
He  directs  them  to  take  four  breakfast-cupfuls  of  the  finest  bran 
with  a  small  teacupful  of  the  best  white  Indian  flour  or  meal,  and 
to  rub  this  up  with  6  ounces  of  butter  and  a  teaspoonful  of  bicar- 
bonate of  soda.  This  mass  is  then  made  into  dough  with  the 
thick  part  of  the  washed  gluten,  which  has  been  left  to  settle  in  a 
pail  of  water  over  night.  The  mass  is  to  be  rolled  into  cakes  and 
baked  in  a  slow  oven  for  two  hours.  Many  of  the  poor  are,  how- 
ever, unable  to  prepare  this  form  of  gluten  bread,  and  accordingly 


682 


CONSTITUTIONAL  DISEASES. 


it  often  becomes  necessary  to  ascertain  liow  far  their  craving  for 
bread  may  be  satisfied  by  the  use  of  well-dried  and  browned  toasted 
bread.  Except  in  very  extreme  forms  of  diabetes,  this  will  some- 
times satisfy  the  craving,  while  the  elimination  of  other  forms  of 
starch  and  saccharine  food  may  produce  sufficient  diminution  in  the 
daily  formation  of  sugar. 

In  the  treatment  of  diabetes  it  is  well  to  remember  that  it  is  not 
desirable  to  totally  arrest  the  elimination  of  sugar  if,  in  so  doing, 
the  nutrition  is  greatly  reduced.  It  is  far  better  to  modify  the  diet 
so  that  the  nutrition  can  be  maintained,  even  though  small  quanti- 
ties of  sugar  continue  to  be  excreted.  This  warning  note  is  of  the 
greatest  importance  in  dealing  with  diabetics  of  advanced  years,  in 
whom  any  great  alteration  in  the  diet  may  be  followed  by  symp- 
toms of  prostration. 


Articles  allowed. 

Almond,  bran,  or  gluten  substitutes  for 
bread,  "  terrified "  or  charred  bread. 

Beef,  mutton,  pork,  veal,  venison,  game, 
poultry,  bacon,  ham,  tongue. 

Fish,  fresh,  smoked,  or  salt ;  crabs,  lob- 
sters, caviare. 

Unthickened  soups,  beef-tea,  and  broth. 

Eggs,  butter,  cream,  cheese. 

Greens,  spinach,  turnip-tops,  cabbage, 
cauliflower,  artichokes,  mushrooms, 
French  beans,  Brussels  sprouts,  broc- 
coli, asparagus  (green),  seakale, 
vegetable  marrow. 

Lettuce,  endive,  radishes,  spring  onions, 
celery,  watercress,  mustard  and  cress, 
cucumber. 

Oil,  vinegar,  pickles,  olives. 

Blanc-mange,  made  with  cream;  jelly, 
flavored  but  unsweetened ;  savory  and 
aspic  jelly. 

Nuts  (nearly  all). 

Tea,  coffee,  cocoa  (from  nibs). 

Claret,  hock,  dry  sherry,  dry  sauterne, 

chablis.  Burgundy. 
Brandy  and  most  spirits  unsweetened. 
Burton  bitter  ale. 
Soda  water,  salutaris  water,  vichy  water, 

apollinaris. 


Articles  forbidden. 
Sugar  in  any  form. 
Wheaten  bread  and  ordinary  biscuits  of 

all  kinds. 
Liver. 


Thickened   soups   or   gravy   thickened 
with  flour. 

Potatoes,  beans,  peas,  carrots,  parsnips, 
Spanish  onions. 


Beetroot. 


Blanc-mange,  made  with  milk,  rice, 
arrowroot,  sago,  tapioca,  macaroni, 
vermicelli,  and  all  kinds  of  pastry 
and  puddings. 

Chestnuts,  Brazil  nuts. 

Port  wine  and  all  sweet  and  sparkling 
wines. 

Bum,  sweetened  gin,  liqueurs. 

Sweet  ales;  stout,  porter,  cider. 

Lemonade,  gingerbeer,  sweet  efferves- 
cent temperance  drinks. 


DIABETES  MELLITUS.  583 

There  are  certain  articles  of  diet  upon  which  very  different  views 
have  been  expressed  :  Oysters  are  recommended  by  Bouchardat  and 
Germain  See,  while,  together  with  mussels,  cockles,  and  the  "  pud- 
ding" of  crabs  and  lobsters,  they  are  forbidden  by  Sir  William 
Roberts.  Well-cooked  turnips  are  permitted  by  Pavy  and  forbidden 
by  Sir  AYilliam  Roberts.  Milk  is  allowed  in  very  small  quantity  by 
Pavy,  in  moderation  by  Ebstein,  while  it  is  forbidden,  by  Germain 
See,  Bouchardat,  and  Cantani ;  the  last-named  also  forbids  cheese 
and  even  butter,  as  they  contain  traces  of  lactose,  and  he  accord- 
ingly advises  the  substitution  of  olive  oil. 

Custard,  made  without  sugar,  is  frequently  permitted,  and  forms 
a  pleasant  variation,  but  would  be  excluded  by  those  who  fear  the 
use  of  milk  in  any  form. 

Still  greater  diversity  of  opinion  is,  however,  shown  with  regard 
to  fruits.  Obviously  all  jams  and  candied  fruits  must  be  forbidden 
on  account  of  the  sugar  employed  as  preservative,  but  it  is  more 
difficult  to  lay  down  rigid  rules  against  all  fresh  fruits.  Pavy  and 
Cantani  exclude  all  fresh  fruits ;  Roberts  and  Seegen  forbid  all 
sweet  fruits,  as  apples,  pears,  plums,  gooseberries,  currants,  grapes, 
oranges,  cherries,  peaches,  and  apricots.  On  the  other  hand,  Bou- 
chardat allows  peaches  and  strawberries,  Ebstein  permits  apples, 
pears,  and  stone  fruits  in  small  quantities,  and  Seegen  makes  similar 
exception  in  favor  of  berries,  such  as  strawberries,  raspberries,  and 
currants,  as  well  as  of  oranges.  As  a  rule,  no  doubt  it  is  safer  to 
exclude  all  fruits,  but  at  certain  seasons  oranges  as  well  as  some 
other  fruits  contain  very  little  sugar,  and  may  perhaps  be  allowed 
in  selected  cases. 

It  should  perhaps  be  repeated  here  that  in  arranging  the  dietary 
for  a  diabetic  patient  it  should  be  remembered  that  although  it  is  of 
primary  importance  to  tabulate  what  substances  are  likely  to  aggra- 
vate the  malady,  the  interference  with  the  daily  habit  may  perhaps 
be  exaggerated  unless  it  is  clearly  shown  that  among  the  things 
allowed  sufficient  variety  can  be  secured. 

The  following  suggestions  for  the  division  of  the  above  dietary 
into  separate  meals  may  be  of  service  : 

Breakfast :  One  or  two  eggs,  bacon,  ham,  tongue,  fish,  grilled 
game  or  poultry.  Tea,  coffee,  or  cocoa,  with  very  little  milk. 
Almond,  bran  or  gluten  bread,  well  buttered. 

Lunch  or  early  dinner  :  Clear  soup,  fish,  meat,  game,  or  poultry. 
Well-cooked  vegetables,  selected   from  the   above  list.     Almond, 


584  CONSTITUTIONAL  DISEASES. 

bran,  or  gluten  bread.  Jelly,  blanc-mange,  or  custard.  Cheese, 
butter,  salad. 

In  the  afternoon  :  Tea,  coffee,  or  cocoa,  with  very  little  milk,  or 
tea  may  be  taken  in  the  Russian  style,  with  slices  of  lemon.  One 
small  slice  of  well-dried  buttered  toast. 

Late  dinner  or  supper  :  Similar  to  lunch  or  early  dinner,  but  in 
smaller  quantity,  as  the  evening  meal  should  always  be  the  lighter 
of  the  two  principal  meals. 

In  adopting  the  dietary  indicated  above,  it  is  .desirable  not  to 
make  an  abrupt  change,  but,  after  the  elimination  of  sugar  from  the 
diet,  to  remove  one  article  after  another  of  those  included  in  the 
list  to  be  avoided,  so  that  the  prescribed  dietary  is  obtained  by  de- 
grees. With  regard  to  the  exclusion  of  sugar,  this  is  frequently 
felt  almost  as  great  a  privation  as  that  of  bread,  and  it  frequently 
demands  considerable  resolution  to  enable  the  patient  to  overcome 
the  distaste  for  tea,  coffee,  or  cocoa  without  sugar  ;  but  should  the 
craving  cause  much  discomfort,  small  quantities  of  saccharine  may 
be  given.  It  is  advisable  to  limit  the  amount  of  saccharine  thus 
used,  since  otherwise  it  is  extremely  apt  to  cause  disorder  of  digestion. 

As  in  diabetes  insipidus,  it  is  undesirable  to  attempt  to  lessen  the 
quantity  of  liquid  taken.  The  sense  of  thirst  is  a  measure  of  the 
loss  of  water  through  the  kidney,  and  this  in  turn  is  to  a  large  ex- 
tent regulated  by  the  amount  of  sugar  in  the  urine.  As  the  daily 
excretion  of  sugar  becomes  reduced  the  sense  of  thirst  speedily 
subsides,  and  it  is,  therefore,  preferable  to  allow  the  patient  to  allay 
thirst  rather  than  to  add  to  his  sufferings  by  unnecessary  prohibi- 
tions. 

Most  observers  are  agreed  that  the  drugs  of  the  greatest  value  in 
diabetes  mellitus  are  opium,  morphine,  and  codeine,  but  it  is  diffi- 
cult to  explain  the  mode  of  action  of  these  remedies.  It  has  been 
found,  however,  that  during  tlieir  administration  the  amount  of 
sugar  falls,  and  this  fall  is  well  marked,  even  when  the  patients 
have  previously  been  strictly  dieted.  One  feature  in  connection 
with  these  remedies  is  of  peculiar  interest — namely,  that  the  dose 
can  with  care  be  greatly  increased  until  relatively  large  proportions 
are  being  given. 

Codeine  has  had  many  advocates,  and  it  has  been  urged  in  its 
favor  that  it  produces  less  drowsiness  than  morphine,  and  also  that 
it  disturbs  the  digestion  less.  I  have  employed  it  largely  in  diabetes, 
but  must  confess  that  in  my  hands  it  has  not  been  free  from  the 


DIABETES  MELLITUS.  585 

production  of  narcotic  symptoms.  Many  patients,  even  when  taking 
comparatively  small  doses  of  this  substance,  have  complained  of 
drowsiness  that  interferes  with  their  work.  Sometimes  this  drowsi- 
ness has  been  so  marked  that  I  have  suspected  that  morphine  might 
possibly  have  been  substituted  for  codeine,  but  even  when  there  was 
no  doubt  about  the  accuracy  of  the  dispensing  there  has  often  been 
complaint  of  drowsiness. 

A  leading  advocate  for  the  employment  of  codeine  is  Dr.  Pavy, 
and  he  recommends  that  J  grain  should  be  given  three  times  a  day, 
and  that  the  amount  should  be  gradually  increased  until  6  or  8 
grains  are  taken  in  the  twenty-four  hours.  On  the  other  hand,  I 
have  known  drowsiness  to  result  when  doses  of  ^  grain  were  being 
given,  and  I  have  never  been  able  to  employ  codeine  in  the  larger 
doses  above  advocated.  In  further  comparison  of  codeine  and 
morphine  it  may  be  mentioned  that  Fraser  regards  codeine  as  weak 
morphine,  and  he  rates  the  theoretical  value  of  a  grain  of  morphine 
above  that  of  15  grains  of  codeine. 

In  general,  where  morphine,  codeine,  or  opium  is  being  employed, 
there  is  no  advantage  in  pushing  the  doses  of  the  remedy  until  no 
further  sugar  reaction  is  obtainable,  since  it  is  often  found  that  a 
continuance  of  the  smaller  dose  over  some  weeks  may  ultimately 
effect  the  disappearance  of  sugar,  while  an  increased  dose  may  be 
followed  by  troublesome  symptoms,  such  as  constipation  or  headache. 

The  number  of  other  drugs  that  have  been  used  in  the  treatment 
of  diabetes  is  almost  infinite,  but  in  this  disease  it  is  extremely  im- 
portant to  avoid  erroneous  inferences  by  changing  the  medicinal 
treatment  and  the  diet  at  the  same  time.  It  is  always  advisable 
to  obtain  a  standard  of  the  amount  of  sugar  that  is  being  passed 
under  the  restricted  diet  before  employing  any  new  remedies.  Even 
the  treatment  with  morphine,  codeine,  or  opium  is  of  little  service 
unless  the  diet  has  previously  been  suitably  modified.  Perhaps  the 
most  valuable  of  the  other  drugs  are  nervine  sedatives,  such  as  potas- 
sium or  ammonium  bromide.  These,  even  if  they  produce  no  direct 
curative  effect,  serve  to  allay  much  of  the  distressing  irritability  of 
diabetic  patients. 

The  tonic  influence  of  arsenious  acid  seems  frequently  to  be  of 
some  service.  It  is  especially  valuable  in  cases  of  diabetes  marked 
by  much  cutaneous  irritation.  Good  results  have  also  been  claimed 
for  a  combination  of  arsenious  acid  with  bromine,  which  has  been 
prepared  under  the  name  of  liquor  arsenii  bromidi,  as  follows  : 


586  CONSTITUTIONAL  DISEASES. 

Arsenious  acid        .......  gr.  Ixxiij. 

Potassium  bicarbonate    ......  gr,  Ixxiij. 

Bromine         ........  gr.  cxvij. 

Water q.  s.  ad  ,^xvj. 

Boil  the  arsenious  acid  and  potassium  bicarbonate  in  2  ounces  of 
water  till  dissolved ;  when  cold,  add  10  ounces  of  water,  then  the 
bromine,  and  make  up  with  water  to  the  given  volume.  Stir  occa- 
sionally during  a  few  hours,  then  filter. 

This  liquor  was  originally  described  by  Dr.  Clemens  as  a  chem- 
ical union  of  arsenic  and  bromine,  but  as  the  action  of  bromine  on 
arsenious  acid  results  in  the  formation  of  arsenic  acid  and  hydro- 
bromic  acid,  the  above  formula  has  been  adjusted  [United  States 
National  Formulary)  to  yield  these  products  as  potassium  salts.^ 

Of  other  nervine  tonics  that  have  been  employed  in  cases  of 
diabetes  mellitus  it  may  be  sufficient  to  mention  cocaine,  strych- 
nine, and  quinine,  while  salicylic  acid  and  salicylates,  lithium,  and 
other  alkaline  carbonates  or  acetates,  nitroglycerin  and  lactic  acid 
have  been  used.  Several  authorities  have  obtaiued  good  results 
with  sodium  salicylate  given  in  large  doses  (75  to  225  grains  in 
the  day)  ;  its  action,  however,  is  uncertain.  The  sugar  frequently 
disappears  from  the  urine  during  the  exhibition  of  the  drug,  but  it 
has  no  effect  on  the  progress  of  the  disease,  as  the  glycosuria  and 
its  attendant  symptoms  reappear  on  the  suspicion  of  the  remedy. 
However,  it  should  be  borne  in  mind  as  suitable  for  the  relief  of 
neuralgia,  which  is  a  frequent  complication  of  diabetes.  Some  of 
the  newer  antipyretics — antipyrine,  antifebrine,  and  exalgine — have 
also  been  given  in  diabetes,  especially  in  those  forms  in  which  neu- 
ralgic troubles  predominate.  Some  observers  recommend  the  em- 
ployment of  comparatively  large  doses  of  these  remedies  ;  thus 
Whitla  advocates  the  employment  of  13  grains  of  antipyrine  four 
or  five  times  a  day,  and  he  significantly  adds  that  this  dose  should 
be  suspended  as  soon  as  albuminuria  appears.  There  seems  to  be 
no  adv^antage  in  such  repeated  employment  of  this  dose,  and  albu- 
minuria is  so  likely  to  occur  from  irritation  of  the  kidney  in  the 
course  of  diabetes  that  it  is  injudicious  to  administer  remedies 
which  Avould  favor  the  onset  of  this  complication. 

Recently  uranium  nitrate  has  been  strongly  recommended.  This 
drug  is  best  given  in  very  dilute  watery  solution ;  1  or  2  grains 

^  Squire's  Companion  to  the  British  Pharmacopoeia,  1899,  p.  117. 


DIABETES  MELLITUS.  587 

may  be  administered  three  times  daily  after  food,  and  the  dose  may 
be  gradually  increased  up  to  10  grains  or  more  three  times  a  day. 
In  spite  of  the  strong  recommendations  that  have  been  published 
concerning  this  drug,  it  is  well  to  employ  it  with  caution,  since  it 
has  been  stated  to  produce  inflammation  of  the  intestines  and  kid- 
neys, failure  of  nervous  power,  and  even  to  promote  the  appearance 
of  sugar  in  the  urine. ^  It  is  further  noteworthy  that  in  the  five 
cases  recorded  by  Dr.  Samuel  West,^  although  beneficial  results 
were  obtained  in  four,  the  administration  had  to  be  abandoned 
entirely  in  the  fifth  case  on  account  of  gastric  disturbance,  this 
patient  being  unable  to  take  more  than  3  grains  twice  daily. 

The  chief  complications  which  may  arise  during  diabetes  mellitus 
are  those  connected  with  (1)  the  skin,  (2)  the  lungs,  (3)  the  kidneys, 
and  (4)  the  nervous  system. 

Some  of  the  skin  affections  are  distinctly  the  result  of  interference 
with  nutrition,  as,  for  example,  gangrene,  perforating  ulcer  of  the 
foot,  boils,  and  carbuncles ;  and  although  palliative  measures  must 
be  adopted,  these  conditions  must  be  met  by  tonic  remedies  and  by 
an  increased  liberality  of  diet,  since  they  are  most  likely  to  arise 
when  the  diabetic  dietary  has  been  too  rigidly  enforced.  On  the 
other  hand,  eczema  and  pruritus  or  balanitis  are  frequently  due  to 
constant  irritation  and  moisture  from  the  excess  of  saccharine  urine. 
The  value  of  the  internal  administration  of  arsenious  acid  has  already 
been  indicated,  but  local  treatment  must  also  be  adopted.  Osier 
recommends  cooling  lotions  of  boric  acid  or  hyposulphite  of  sodium 
(1  ounce,  water  1  quart),  but  a  solution  of  lead  subacetate  with  a 
little  tincture  of  opium  and  rose  water  is  often  more  soothing. 
Bran  baths  with  eucalyptus  oil  or  alkaline  baths  may  be  used  once 
or  twice  a  week  ;.  frequently  greater  relief  is  afforded  by  the  appli- 
cation of  zinc  ointment  rendered  thin  enough  by  the  addition  of 
liquid  petroleum  to  be  painted  over  the  irritated  surface. 

Although  the  pulmonary  complications  are  extremely  dangerous, 
since  they  include  acute  pneumonia,  gangrene  of  the  lung,  and  tuber- 
culosis, which  often  assume  a  pneumonic  type,  these  affections  can 
only  be  treated  upon  the  general  principles  which  have  already  been 
described. 

The  complications  connected  with  the  kidney  and  bladder  include 

^  Therapeutic  Gazette,  October,  1888. 

^  British  Medical  Journal,  August  24,  1895. 


588  CONSTITUTIONAL  DISEASES. 

albuminuria,  and  occasionally  renal  cirrhosis  and  cystitis.  The  albu- 
minuria, when  not  associated  with  organic  renal  changes,  is  of  com- 
paratively little  importance  ;  it  is  generally  slight,  though  the  amount 
may  vary  greatly  from  day  to  day.  Usually,  however,  this  symptom 
occurs  late  in  the  course  of  the  disease,  and  it  sometimes  forms  a 
prelude  to  diabetic  coma.  As  a  rule,  however,  the  renal  complica- 
tions afford  no  indication  for  special  treatment  on  account  of  their 
association  with  diabetes. 

Diabetic  coma  is  the  most  serious  of  the  nervous  complications, 
since  it  appears  invariably  to  cause  a  fatal  termination  either  within 
a  few  hours  or  within  from  one  to  five  days.  It  is  apparently  due 
to  toxaemia,  which  has  been  variously  attributed  to  acetonsemia  (the 
breath  smelling  strongly  of  acetone  and  the  urine  giving  the  acetone 
reaction),  to  uraemia  (owing  to  the  frequent  existence  of  albuminuria 
before  or  during  the  attack),  and  to  lipsemia  (the  capillaries  in  the 
lungs  having  occasionally  been  found  to  be  obstructed  with  fatty 
emboli).  Diabetic  coma  may  be  preceded  by  weakness,  fainting, 
and  somnolence,  which  gradually  deepens  until  complete  uncon- 
sciousness ensues,  or  there  may  be  premonitory  dyspeptic  symptoms 
and  great  dyspnoea,  or  the  coma  may  develop  rapidly  without  any 
more  marked  premonitory  symptoms  than  headache.  The  treat- 
ment of  diabetic  coma  is  very  disappointing,  very  few  successes 
having  been  recorded,  although  in  some  instances  consciousness  has 
been  partly  or  wholly  regained  for  a  few  days.  It  has  been  main- 
tained '  that  the  inhalation  of  oxygen  diminishes  the  production  of 
sugar  in  diabetes,  and  that  it  has  proved  capable  of  averting  diabetic 
coma  by  the  oxidation  of  products  that  would  otherwise  form  diacetic 
and  oxybutyric  acids ;  increased  oxidation  has  also  been  attempted  ^ 
by  ozone  dissolved  in  water  with  the  addition  of  2.5  per  cent,  of 
sodium  hypophosphite,  or  in  various  vegetable  and  ethereal  oils,  or 
in  cod-liver  oil.  Solution  of  hydrogen  peroxide  may  be  given  in 
doses  of  J  to  2  drachms,  or  ozonic  ether  may  be  employed  in  doses 
of  ^  to  1  drachm.  All  of  these,  however,  must  be  regarded  as 
means  of  averting  threatened  coma  rather  than  as  being  of  any 
particular  value  after  its  development. 

Intravenous  injection  of  saline  solution  is  more  hopeful,  since  it 
serves  to  dilute  the  toxic  agent  in  the  blood.  In  the  normal  blood 
serum  sodium  chloride  is  present  in  the  proportion  of  0.6  per  cent., 

^  Poster,  Therapeutics,  vol.  ii.  p.  51.  ^  Ibid.,  vol.  ii.  p.  58. 


DIABETES  MELLITUS.  589 

and  the  blood  being  alkaline,  it  has  often  been  thought  that  the 
saline  solution  intended  for  intravenous  injection  should  also  be 
made  alkaline.  Accordingly  Hayem^  proposed  an  artificial  serum 
containing : 

Sodium  hydrate  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  15.}  gr. 

Sodium  chloride  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  80  gr. 

Sodium  sulphate  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  39  gr. 

Boiled  water  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       3  fl.oz. 

Little  proposed  a  solution  composed  as  follows  : 

Sodium  chloride    .         .         .         .         .         .         .     50  gr. 

Potassium  chloride         .         .         .         .         .         .       2  gr. 

Water 1  pint. 

The  following  solution  has  also  found  considerable  favor  : 

Sodium  chloride     .         .         .         .         .         .         .     93  gr. 

Liquor  sodse 20  drops. 

Water 2  pints. 

Dr.  Samuel  M.  Brickner  maintains,  however,  that  clinical  expe- 
rience has  shown  that  a  solution  containing  the  normal  proportion 
of  sodium  chloride  fulfils  every  demand.  It  is  customary  to  employ 
a  solution  containing  a  drachm  of  sodium  chloride  in  a  quart  of  hot 
water.  This  is  ordinarily  allowed  to  cool  to  the  temperature  of  the 
body ;  Brickner,  however,  recommends  that  it  should  be  infused 
at  a  temperature  between  116°  and  118°  F.  It  is  unnecessary  to 
describe  the  operation  of  transfusion  in  detail.  The  median  cephalic 
or  the  median  basilic  is  the  vein  usually  selected,  and  after  the  in- 
sertion of  the  canula  from  20  to  40  ounces  are  slowly  transfused  by 
fluid  pressure,  the  vessel  containing  the  saline  solution  being  raised 
from  three  to  four  feet  above  the  canula.  Before  the  insertion  of 
the  canula  great  care  must  be  taken  to  avoid  the  entrance  of  air  by 
first  allowing  some  of  the  solution  to  flow  freely  through  the  India- 
rubber  tube  and  the  canula. 

Greater  attenuation  of  the  toxic  matter  in  the  blood  may  also  be 
secured  by  the  method  suggested  by  Landois,  and  termed  by  him 
"  depletory  transfusion."  This  consists  in  the  transfusion  of  normal 
defibrinated  blood  into  a  vein,  while  an  artery  is  opened  to  permit 
the  escape  of  the  poisoned  blood.  The  use  of  defibrinated  blood, 
however,  presents  so  many  difiiculties  that  this  method  is  now  rarely 
employed. 

^  Foster,  Therapeutics,  vol.  ii.  p.  321. 


590  CONSTITUTIONAL  DISEASES. 

It  should  be  added  that  the  chances  of  success  in  this  treatment 
are  materially  increased  by  the  early  transfusion  of  saline  solution, 
so  soon  indeed  as  warnings  of  diabetic  coma  are  apparent. 

The  other  nervous  complications  of  diabetes  mellitus  vary  greatly 
in  importance.  Reference  has  already  been  made  to  the  tendency 
to  hypochondriasis,  but  many  forms  of  neuritis  are  fairly  frequent, 
such  as  neuralgia,  lightning  pains  in  the  legs,  loss  of  the  knee-jerk, 
and  paraplegia.  These,  together  with  diabetic  retinitis,  must  be 
treated  upon  general  principles. 


INDEX. 


A  BSCESS  of  the  liver,  318-321 
A         multiple,  319 

due  to  septic  and  pysemic  pro- 
cesses, 319 
symptom  of,  enlarged  tender  liver, 
320 
jaundice,  320 
pyaemia,  319 
pyrexia,  399 
treatment  of,  diet  in,  320 
enemata  in,  321 
glycerin  suppositories  in,  321 
purgatives  in,  320 
quinine  in,  320 
saline  solutions  in,  342 
stimulants  in,  320 
surgical  measures  in,  320 
tropical,  318 

due  to  dysentery,  318 
symptom  of,  deterioration  in  health, 
318 
sense  of  weight,  319 
treatment  of,  blisters  in,  319 
morphine  in,  319 
surgical  measures  in,  319 
Abscess  of  the  lung,  1 20,  121 

associated  with  pneumonia,  120 
with  pyaemia,  120 
treatment  of,  antiseptics  in,  121 
diet  in,  120 

hygienic  measures  in,  120 
inhalations  of  turpentine  in,  120 
quinine  in,  120 
surgical  measures  in,  120,  121 
Acute  yellow  atrophy  of  the  liver,  317- 
321 
symptom  of,   cerebral, 
317 
changes  in  urine, 

318 
gastro-d  u  o  d  e  n  a  1 

catarrh,  317 
hemorrhages,   317 
jaundice,  317 
treatment    of,    antipy- 
retics in,  318 
magnesium      sul- 
phate in,  318 
saline     purgatives 

in,  318 
vapor    baths    and 
wet  pack  in,  318 


Addison's  disease,  56,  57 
causes  of,  56 

symptom  of,  anaemia,  45,  56 
asthenia,  56 
constipation,  57 
diarrhoea,  57 
dyspepsia,  56 
palpitation,  47 
pigmentation  of  skin,  56 
syncope,  57 
vomiting,  57,  154 
treatment  of,  alkalies  in,  57 
diet  in,  57 
digitalis  in,  58 
gastric  sedatives  in,  57 
ice  in,  57 
purgatives  in,  57 
stimulants  in,  57 
strophanthus  in,  58 
suprarenal  extract  in,  58 
tonics  in,  57 
Ague.     See  Malarial  fevers. 
Albuminuria,  335-339 

cause  of,  adolescence,  335-337 
cold,  336 

febrile  conditions,  337 
mental  emotions,  337 
muscular  exercise,  337 
nephritis,  336 
neuroses,  337 
form  of,  cyclic,  335 
dietetic,  337 
extra-renal,  336 
functional,  335 
intermittent,  335 
renal,  335 
treatment   of,    ammonium    bromide 
in,  338 
astringents  in,  339 
bismuth  preparations  in,  339 
diet  in,  335,  337,  364 
diluted  hydrocyanic  acid  in,  339 
gentian  in,  339 

hygienic  measures  in,  335,  338 
saline  purgatives  in,  338 
sodium  bicarbonate  in,  339 
tonics  in,  338 
with  alcoholism,  409,  410 
with  antitoxin,  468 
with  Asiatic  cholera,  486 
with  cirrhosis  of  the   kidney,  365, 
370 


592 


INDEX. 


Albuminuria  with  cirrhosis  of  the  liver, 
307,  308 
with  diabetes  insipidus,  577 

mellitus,  586 
with  German  measles,  437 
with  gout,  548 
with  jaundice,  chronic  obstructive, 

294 
with  lardaceous  disease  of  the  liver, 

317 
with  nephritis,  acute,  354 
chronic,  358 
scarlatinal,  356 
with  scarlet  fever,  356,  433 
with  tuberculosis,  489,  491 
with  typhus  fever,  458 
with  valvular  lesions,  chronic,  33 
with  whooping-cough,  443 
Alcoholism,  405-411 
acute,  406 

treatment  of,  apomorphine  in,  406 
ether  in,  406 
stomach-pump  in,  406 
warmth  in,  406 
zinc  sulphate  in,  406 
chronic,  406 

associated  with   alcoholic   neu- 
ritis, 406  _ 
with  cirrhosis  of  the  liver,  406 
with  gastric  catarrh,  406 
with  granular  kidney,  406 
with  intestinal  catarrh,  406 
treatment  of,  cocaine  in,  406 
homes  for  inebriates  in,  406 
hypnotics  in,  406 
massage  in,  407 
rest  in,  407 
tonics  in,  407 
delirium  tremens,  407-411 

complications   of,   albuminuria, 

409,  410 
fatty  degeneration  of  the  heart, 

409 
pneumonia,  409 
risks  of  suicide,  408 
sleeplessness,  409 
treatment  of,  administration  of  nu- 
triment in,  408 
alcohol  in,  409,  411 
bromides  in,  410 
chloral  in,  410 
digitalis  in,  410 
hyoscine  in,  410 
hypnotics  in,  409 
limitation  of  movements  in,  408 
nux  vomica  in,  411 
opium  in,  410 
paraldehyde  in,  410 
saline  purgatives  in,  409 
spirit  of  ammonia  in,  411 
strychnine  in,  411 
sulphonal  in,  410 


Alcoholism  with  cirrhosis  of  the  kidney, 
364 
of  the  liver,  303,  309 
with  congestion  of  the  liver,  297 
with  diarrhoea,  238,  239 
with  dyspepsia,  162 
with  emphysema,  133 
with  erysipelas,  473 
with  fatty  liver,  321 
with  gastritis,  acute,  164,  167 

chronic,  172 
with  lead  poisoning,  213 
with  cesophagismus,  144 
with  uric  acid,  324 
Anaemia,  45-47 

causes  of,  45,  46 

symptom  of,  breathlessness,  45 

headache,  400 

oedema,  45 

pallor,  45 

palpitation,  33,  45 
treatment  of,  arsenic  in,  37 

chalybeate  waters  in,  47 

diet  in,  45 

hsematinics  in,  21,  33,  36,  45 

hygienic  measures  in,  45 
with  Addison's  disease,  45,  56 
with  angina  pectoris,  36 
with  chlorosis,  45 
with  dropsy,  313,  355 
with  endocarditis,  21 
with  exophthalmic  goitre,  45,  54 
with  fatty  liver,  321 
with  gastric  neuroses,  198 
with  gastritis,  chronic,  170 
with  goitre,  53 
with  leucocythsemia,  45,  50 
with  lymphadenoma,  45,  52 
with  malarial  fe^'ers,  483 
with  myxcedema,  45 
with  osteo-arthritis,  562 
with  rickets,  569 
with  scurvy,  571 

with  valvular  lesions,  chronic,  22 
Aneurism,  40,  45 
causes  of,  40 
symptom  of,  aphonia,  44 

cough,  41,  43,  135 

dysphagia,  41,  44,  145 

dyspnoea,  44 

pain,  41,  43,  44 
treatment  of,  belladonna  in,  43 

bromides  in,  41,  44 

diet  in,  41 

electrolysis  in,  42 

erythrol  tetranitrate  in,  45 

hygienic  measures  in,  40 

ice  bag  in,  43 

introduction  of  foreign  bodies  in, 
42 

iodides  in,  40 

nitrites  in ,  44 


INDEX. 


593 


Aneurism,  treatment  of,   opium   in,   41, 
43,44 
stimulants  in,  44 
surgical  measures  in,  42 
venesection  in,  41 
Angina  pectoris,  34,  37 

cause  of,  cardiac  lesions,  34 

dyspepsia,  36 
symptoms  of,  34 
treatment  of,  amyl  nitrite  in,  35 
arsenic  in,  37 
diet  in,  36 

eiythrol  tetranitrate  in,  35 
inhalations  in,  36 
iron  in,  37 

liquor  trinitrini  in,  35 
manitol  hexanitrate  in,  35 
morphine  in,  36 
nitroglycerin  in,  35 
potassium  iodide  in,  37 
quiniiie  in  37 
sodium  nitrite  in,  35 
stimulants  in,  35 
strychnine  in,  37 
vasodilators  in,  34 
Angina  with  fatty  degeneration,  31,  33 

with  gout,  558 
Anorexia  with  gout,  548 

with  hydronephrosis,  347 
with  osteo-arthritis,  561 
with  stomatitis,  140 
with  trichinosis,  279 
with  tuberculosis,  522,  523 
Antitoxin  in  diphtheria,  425,  463,  467, 
471 
in  diphtheritic  croup,  82 
in  erysipelas,  473 
in  lockjaw,  477,  478 
Aortic  regurgitation  in  chronic  valvular 

lesions,  26 
Aphonia.    See  Hoarseness  and  aphonia. 
Aphthous    stomatitis.      See    Stomatitis, 

aphthous. 
Apoplexy,  411,  415 

due  to  syphilis,  413 
symptom  of,  muscular  degeneration, 
414 
paralysis,  411 
unconsciousness,  411 
treatment  of,  aconite  in,  412,  413 
bromides  in,  413 
calomel  in,  412 
castor  oil  in,  412 
cold  applications  in,  412 
croton  oil  in,  412 
diet  in,  413,  414 
electricity  in,  414 
laxatives  in,  414 
leeches  in,  412 
mercurial  ointment  in,  413 
mustai'd  plasters  in,  411 
nutrient  enemata  in,  413 


Apoplexy,  treatment  of,  olive  oil  in,  412 
passive  movements  in,  414 
potassium  iodide  in,  413 
purgatives  in,  412,  414 
stimulants  in,  412 
surgical  measures  in,  414 
veratrnm  viride  in,  412 
warmth  in,  411 

Appendicitis,  255,  258 
causes  of,  255,  258 
symptoms  of,  collapse,  257 

pain,  255 
treatment  of,  belladonna  in,  256 
calomel  in,  257 
diet  in,  255 
enemata  in,  256,  257 
hot  fomentations  and  poultices 

in,  256,  257 
laxatives  in,  257 
opium  in,  255,  267 
rest  in,  255 

saline  purgatives  in,  256 
surgical  measures  in,  258 
turpentine  stupes  in,  256 

Arthritis  deformans.  See  Osteo-arthritis. 

Asthma.   See  Bronchial  asthma  and  dysp- 


BATHS,  alkaline,  in  diabetes  mellituSy 
587 

in  gout,  558 
bran,  in  diabetes  mellitus,  587 

in  gout,  558 
cold,  in  congestion  of  the  liver,  301 

in  constipation,  217 

in  meningitis,  416 

in  oxaluria,  329 

in  phthisis  518,  519 

in  rheumatic  fever,  537 

in  typhoid  fever,  451,  452 

in  typhus  fever,  457 
hot,  in  dysentery,  246 

in  gallstones,  282 

in  hsemoglobinuria,  334 

in  intestinal  obstruction,  254 

in  jaundice,  chronic  obstructive, 
294 

in  measles,  435,  436 

in  nephritis,  acute,  351 
scarlatinal,  357 

in  pyelitis,  344 

in   rheumatism,    chronic,    541, 
544 

in  scarlet  fever,  433,  434 
hot-air,  in  gout,  subacute,  556 

in  nephritis,  chronic,  361 

in  osteo-arthritis,  563 
sulphur,  in  gouty  eczema,  559 
vapoi-,  in  cirrhosis  of  the   kidney, 
368 

in  hsematuria,  332 


38 


594 


INDEX. 


Baths,  vapor,  in  ha^iiioglobinuria,  333 
in  locomotor  ataxia,  3S9 
in  nephritis,  aoute,  352 
chronic,  oliO 
Bilharzia  hannatobia,  331 
Bronchial  asthma,  92,  98 
causes  of,  92 

symptom  of,  constipation,  93 
dvspepsia.  93 
dyspna\i,  92,  93,  96 
treatment  of.  apomorphine  in, 97 
arsenic  in,  97 
belh\donna  in,  94 
cafl'eine  citrate  in,  97 
cannabis  indica  in,  96 
chloral  hydrate  in,  96 
cigarettes  of  cubebs  in,  95 
of  nitre  in,  95 
of  sodium  arsenate  in, 

95 
of  stramonium  in,  95 
coca  in,  94 
emetics  in,  96,  97 
ether  in,  96 
eucalyptus  in.  94 
hygienic  measures  in.  97 
hvoscine  hvdrobromide  in, 

"96 
hyoscyamns  in,  94 
inhalations  of  amvl  nitrite 
in.  94 
of  chloroform  in.  94 
of  ether  in,  94 
of  ethyl  iodide  in,  94 
of  eucalyptus  in,  94 
of  nitrous  fumes  in,  94 
of  oil  of  cajupui  in.  95 
of eucalyptus  in. 95 
of  turpentine  in. 95 
of  oxygen  in,  96 
of  steam  in,  95 
of  stramonium  in,  94 
of  tincture  of  benzoin 
in,  95 
lobelia  in,  94 
morphine  in.  96 
uux  vomica  in,  97 
pilocarpine  in,  97 
potassium  bromide  in,  96 

iodide  iu,  96 
pyridine  in,  95 
sal  volatile  in,  96 
sedatives  in,  9Ci,  97 
stimulants  in,  97 
stramonium  in,  96 
strychnine  in.  97 
Bronchiectasis,  91,  92 
causes  of.  91 

treatment  of.  health  resorts  in,  91 
hygienic  measures  in.  91,  92 
inhalations  of  carbolic  acid  in, 
91 


I  Bronchiectasis,  treatment  of,  inhalations 
of  chlorine  in,  91 
of  creosote  in,  91 
of  iodine  in,  91 
of  tar  in,  91 
of  turpentine  in.  91 
myrtol  in,  91 
santal  oil  iu.  91 
sprays  of  carbolic  acid  in,  91 
of  eucalyptus  oil  iu,  91 
of  pinol  in,  91 
Bronchitis,  acute,  83-S8 
causes  of.  83 

symptom  of,  cough.  84.  86 
dyspnoea,  88 
insomnia,  86 
pain,  85 
treatment  of,  acids  in,  84 
alkalies  in,  84 
apomorphine  in,  87 
chloral  hydrate  in,  86 
chloroform  in,  88 
compound  tincture  of  cam- 
phor in,  86 
diaphoretics  in,  S4 
diet  in,  88 
digitalis  in,  87 
emetics  in,  87 
expectorants  in,  85,  86 
inhalations  of    ammonium 
chloride  in,  86 
of  creosote  in,  84 
of  lobelia  in,  88 
of  oxygen  in,  87 
of  sodium  bicarbonate 

iu,  86 
of  steam  in,  83 
of  stramonium  in,  88 
of  tincture  of  benzoin 

in,  85 
of  turpentine  in,  83 
leeches  in,  85 
morphine  in,  88 
potassium  bromide  iu,  86 

iodide  iu,  88 
poultices  and  fomentations 

in,  84.  85 
purgatives  in,  78,  84 
quinine  in.  87 
sedatives  in,  84 
squill  in,  85,  86 
stimulants  iu,  86 
stixiphanthus  in,  87 
strychnine  in,  87 
sulphonal  in,  86 
tartarated  antimony  in,  84, 

86 
tonics  iu,  86 
venesection  in,  86 
chronic,  88-90 
causes  of,  88 
symptoms  of,  88,  89 


INDEX. 


595 


Bronchitis,  chronic,  treatment  of,  alka- 
lies in,  89 
balsamics  in,  89 
creosote  in,  90 
expectorants  in,  89 
hygienic  measures  in,  89 
inhalations  of  creosote  in,  90 

of  menthol  in,  90 
laxatives  in,  89 
purgatives  in,  89 
respirators  in,  90 
tar  and  terebene  in,  90 
with  cirrhosis  of  the  kidney,   368, 

369 
with  congestion  of  the  liver,  296 
with  gangrene  of  the  lung,  121 
with  gastritis,  chronic,  171 
with  gout,  557 
with  influenza,  460,  462 
with  measles,  436 
with  nephritis,  acute,  355 
with  pertussis,  438-441,  443 
with  rickets,  568,  570 
Bronchopneumonia  with  measles,  436 
Bronchorrhoea,  90 
symptoms  of,  90 

treatment   of,    ammonium    chloride 
in,  90 
counter-irritants  in,  90 
emetics  in,  90 
expectorants  in,  90 
poultices   and   fomentations  in, 

91 
quillaia  in,  90 
senega  in,  90 
sprays  of  ipecacuanha  in,  91 


pANCER  of  the  liver,  311-314 
\J  symptom  of,  aneemia,  314 

ascites,  312 

dropsy,  313 

gastric  disturbances,  312 

jaundice,  312 

pain,  312 

pyrexia,  313 
treatment  of,  antiseptics  in,  312 

carminatives  in,  313 

hot  fomentations  in,  313 

morphine  in,  312 

opium  in,  312 

saline  purgatives  in,  313 

tonic  preparations  in,  314 
of  the  stomach,  191-198 
age  of  occurrence,  192 
symptom  of,  cachexia,  192,  196 

constipation,  192,  197 

dyspepsia,  191 

flatulence,  191,  192 

hsematemesis,  191 

nausea,  192 

obstruction,  192 


Cancer  of  the  stomach,  symptom  of,  pain, 
192_,  193,  194,  196 
retention,  191 
vomiting,  192,  197 
treatment    of,    alkaline    carbo- 
nates in,  196 
atropine  sulphate  in,  196 
bismuth     preparations    in, 

195 
carbolic  acid  in,  196 
charcoal  in,  195 
diet  in,  192,  193 
glycerin    suppositories    in, 

197 
hydrocyanic  acid  in,  196 
ice  in,  193,  197 
injection  of  water  in,  193 
lavage  in,  194 
magnesium    carbonate    in, 

196 
morphine  in,  194,  197 
nutrient  enemata  in,  198 
opium  in,  194,  197 
purgatives  in,  193 
surgical  measures  in,   192, 
197,  198 
Catarrh,  chronic  nasal,  63,  64 
causes  of,  63 

treatment  of,  astringent  in- 
jections in,  63 
cocaine  in,  64 
galvano-cautery  in,  63 
inhalations  in,  64 
insufflations  in,  64 
iodine  in,  64 
local    applications  in, 

63 
silver  nitrate  in,  64 
Catarrh,  nasal.     See  Coryza. 
Cerebral  hemorrhage.    See  Hemorrhage, 
cerebral,  and  apoplexy, 
vomiting,  154.     See  also  Ursemia. 
Chicken-pox,  430,  431 

treatment    of,   alkaline   lotions    in, 
430 
antiseptics  in,  430 
diaphoretics  in,  430 
diuretics  in,  430 
isolation  in,  430 
nux  vomica  in,  430 
poultices  in,  430 
quinine  in,  430 
saline  purgatives  in,  431 
stimulants  in,  430 
Chlorosis,  47-50 
causes  of,  47 

symptom  of,  ansemia,  45,  47 
breathlessness,  45,  47 
constipation,  47 
cough, 134 
dyspepsia,  47,  170 
neuralgia,  424 


596 


INDEX. 


Chlorosis,  symptom  of,  neuroses,  198,  199 
oedema,  45,  47 
pallor,  45,  47 
palpitation,  34,  45,  47 
treatment  of,  ammonium  carbonate 
in,  48 
arsenic  in,  49 
bone-marrow  in,  49 
chalybeate  springs  in,  49 
digitalis  in,  49 
hsematinics  in,  47,  48 
hygienic  measures  in,  49 
laxatives  in,  48 
manganese  in,  49 
rhubarb  in,  48 
strophanthus  in,  49 
Cholera,  Asiatic,  481-486 

symptoms    of,    abdominal    and 
lumbar  pains,  483,  486 
albuminuria,  486 
collapse,  483,  485 
diarrhoea,  483 
hsematuria,  332,  486 
pulmonary      engorgement, 

486 
reaction,  483,  486 
thirst,  485 
vomiting,  485 
treatment  of,  aromatic  sulphuric 
acid  in,  485 
bismuth  salicylate  in,  484 
calomel  in,  484 
castor  oil  in,  483,  484 
cocaine  in  485 
ether  in,  485 
expectorants  in,  486 
HafFkine's  inoculations  in, 

425,  483 
hot    applications   in,    485, 

486 
ice  in,  485 
morphine  in,  485 
/3-naphthol  in,  484 
opium  in,  484 
saline  aperients  in,  486 

solutions  in,  486 
salol  in,  484 
stimulants  in,  486 
thymol  in,  484 
tonics  in,  486 
Chorea,  379-383 

due  to  acute  rheumatism,  379,  380, 

382 
due  to  pregnancy,  380,  382 
treatment  of,  antipyretics  in,  383 
arsenic  in,  381 
belladonna  in,  382,  383 
chloral  hydrate  in,  382 
chloroform  in,  383 
cimicifuga  in,  382 
cod-liver  oil  in,  380,  381 
hygienic  measures  in,  383 


Chorea,  treatment  of,  hyoscine  in,  383 
iron  in,  380 

limitations  of  movement  in,  382 
massage  in,  382 
morphine  in,  382 
potassium  bromide  in,  381 
purgatives  in,  381 
rest  in,  380 
silver  nitrate  in,  381 
tepid  sponging  in,  382 
tonics  in,  383 
wet  pack  in,  382 
zinc  sulphate  in,  381 
valerianate  in,  381 
with  endocarditis,  19 
Avith  rheumatism,  538 
with  scarlet  fever,  434 
with  worms,  273 
Chyluria,  334,  335  _ 

due  to  the  filaria  sanguinis  hominis, 

334 
treatment  of,  astringents  in,  335 

injections  of  perchloride  of  iron 

in,  335 
irrigation  of  the  bladder  in,  335 
Cirrhosis  of  kidney,  363-371 

cause  of,  alcoholism,  364 
gout,  363,  364 
lead -poisoning,  363 
syphilis,  363 
complication  of,  bronchitis,  369 
dropsy,  371 
epistaxis,  369 
hemorrhage,  cerebral,  369 
gastric,  369 
intestinal,  369 
retinal,  369 
hydrothorax,  371 
pericarditis,  369 
pleurisy,  371 
pneumonia,  371 
symptom  of,  albuminuria,  364, 
365,  370 
cardiac  irregularities,  368 
diarrhoea,  367 
dyspepsia,  365,  367 
dyspnoea,  368 
headache,  365,  369 
mental  depression,  364 
muscular  weakness,  370 
uraemia,  365,  367,  368,  370 
vomiting,  365,  367 
treatment    of,    antipyretics   in, 
369 
aspiration  in,  368 
bismuth  salts  in,  367 
carbolic  acid  in,  367 
cardiac  stimulants  in,  368, 

371 
chloride   of  gold   and    so- 
dium in,  365 
chloroform  in,  370,  371 


INDEX. 


597 


Cirrhosis  of  kidney,  treatment  of,  creosote 

in,  367 
croton  oil  in,  370 
diaphoretics  in,  370 
diet  in,  365,  367,  370 
digitalis  in,  368 
diuretics  in,  365,  371 
diuretin  in,  368 
enemata  of  starch  and  opium 

in,  367 
erythrol  tetranitratein,  366 
exercise  in,  370 
fomentations  in,  368,  371 
gentian  in,  367 
hydragogue  purgatives  in, 

367,  368 
hydrocyanic  acid  in,  367 
hyoscine  hydrobromide  in, 

366 
hypnotics  in,  366 
injection  of  water  in,  371 
iodine  in,  367 
leeches  in,  369 
morphine  in,  370 
nitrites  in,  366,  368,  370 
opium  in,  366 
paraldehyde  in,  366 
pilocarpine  in,  371 
potassium  iodide  in,  364 
poultices  in,  369 
purgatives  in,  366 
sedatives  in,  368 
silver  salts  in,  367 
sodium  carbonate  in,  367 
squill  in,  371 
stimulant  expectorants   in, 

370,  371 
stimulants  in,  370 
strophanthus  in,  368 
tonics  in,  370 
vapor  baths  and  wet  pack 

in,  368,  370 
venesection  in,  371 
warm  climate  in,  364 
with  diabetes  mellitus,  588 
Cirrhosis  of  the  liver,  302,  311 

cause  of,  alcoholism,  303,  309 

syphilis,  309 
symptom  of,  albuminuria,  308 
alterations   in   urine,    308, 

309 
ascites,  304 
constipation,  308 
diarrhoea,  303,  306,  308 
dyspepsia,  303,  309 
dropsy,  306,  308 
gastric   and   intestinal    ca- 
tarrh, 303 
hsematemesis,  303 
jaundice,   307 
melsena,  303 
nausea,  303 


Cirrhosis  of  the  liver,  symptom  of,  ob- 
structive, 302 
toxic  cerebral,  310 
vomiting,  303 
treatment  of,  alcohol  in,  311 
alkalies  in,  309 
aspiration  in,  305,  307 
astringents  in,  309 
bismuth  in,  309 
digitalis  in,  307,  309,  310 
diluted    hydrocyanic    acid 

in,  309 
diuretics  in,  304,  305,  307, 

310 
gastric  sedatives  in,  302 
hydragogue  and  saline  pur- 
gatives in,  302,  303,  305, 
307,  309 
injection  of  salines  in,  311 
intestinal  sedatives  in,  309 
local  ansesthetics  in,  305 
mercurial  preparations  in, 

309 
morphine  in,  311 
nitrous  ether  in,  310 
pepsin  in,  309 
potassium  iodide  in,  309 

nitrate  in,  310 
rest  in,  304 
squill  in,  310 
tonics  in,  308,  309 
Coley's  fluid  in  malignant  disease,  425 
Colic,  hepatic,  281-288 
causes  of,  281 

treatment  of,  alkaline  solutions 
in,  283,  284,  285 
ammonium  chloride  in,  286 

phosphate  in,  286 
anaesthetics  in,  283 
atropine  sulphate  in,  282 
calomel  in,  286 
diet  in,  285 
draughts  of  liquid  in,  283, 

285 
emetics  in,  284 
enemata  in,  284 
euonymin  in,  286 
exercise  in,  286 
hot  fomentations  and  baths 

in,  282,  283 
hydrocyanic  acid  in,   282, 

284 
ice  in,  284 
laxatives  in,  286 
mercurial  preparations  in, 

286 
mineral  waters  in,  285,  286 
morphine  in,  282,  283 
olive  oil  in,  283 
podophyllin  in,  286 
purgatives  in,  284,  286 
sodium  benzoate  in,  286 


598 


INDEX. 


Colic,  hepatic,  treatment  of,  sodium  sali- 
cylate in,  286 
stimulants  in,  284,  285 
intestinal,  204-211 

causes  of  chronic  constipation, 
204 
gallstones,  204 
gout,  204 

hard  masses  of  feces,  204 
neuroses,  209,  210 
rheumatism,  204 
spasm  of  the  muscles,  204, 

205 
undigested  food,  204,  206 
worms,  204,  209 

symptom  of,  constipation,  207, 
208 
diarrhoea,  207,  208 
pallor,  207 
sudden  pain,  206 
vomiting,  207 

treatment  of,    in   adults,    anti- 
spasmodics in,  210 
arsenic  in,  210 
asafcEtida  in,  210 
belladonna  in,  205 
carminatives  in,  205 
diet  in,  210 
enemata  in,  20f> 
morphine  in,  205 
nux  vomica  in,  205 
opium  in,  205,  206 
purgatives  in,  205 
zinc  preparations  in,  210 

treatment  of,  in  infants,  brandy 
in,  208 
bromides  in,  209 
carminatives  in,  207,  208 
castor  oil  in,  209 
ipecacuanha  wine  in,  209 
sodium  bicarbonate  in,  208 
stimulants  in,  208 
lead,  211-213 

associated  with  alcoholism,  213 
with  gout,  213 
with  kidney  disease,  213 

causes  of,  211,  213 

symptoms  of,  blue  line  in  gums, 
211 
constipation,  211 
emaciation,  211 
pain,  212 
pallor,  211 

treatment  of,  acid  drinks  in,  211 
citric  acid  in,  212 
fomentations  in,  212 
magnesium    sulphate    in, 

212 
morphine  in,  212 
opiates  in,  212 
potassium  iodide  in,  212 
poultices  in,  212 


Colic,  lead,  treatment  of,  saline  purga- 
tives in,  211,  212 
sodium  bicarbonate  in,  212 
sulphuric  acid  in,  212 
tonics  and  bitters  in,  212 
vegetable  purgatives  in,  212 
Collapse  due  to  alcoholism ,  406 
due  to  anaesthetics,  39 
due  to  aneurism,  43 
due  to  appendicitis,  257 
due  to  Asiatic  cholera,  483,  485 
due  to  diarrhoea,  232   237 
due  to  diphtheria,  470 
due  to  dysentery,  246 
due  to  erysipelas,  473 
due  to  gastric  ulcer,  189,  190 
due  to  hepatic  colic,  284 
due  to  hydrophobia,  474 
due  to  intestinal  obstruction,  250 
due  to  lockjaw,  476 
due  to  maniacal  chorea,  383 
due  to  metastatic  gout,  557 
due  to  peritonitis,  acute,  265 
due  to  rheumatic  fever,  537 
due  to  typhoid  fever,  452,  454 
due  to  whooping-cougb,  439 
Coma,  diabetic,  588 

vigil  in  typhoid  fever,  448 
Congestion  of  the  liver.     See  Liver,  con- 
gestion of. 
Constipation,  213-227 

due  to  defective  digestive  secretions, 

214  _ 
due  to  insufficient  liquid  light,  214, 

216 
treatment  of,  aloes  in,  221,  222,  223 
baths  in,  215 
carminatives  in,  221,  223 
cascara  sagrada  in,  223 
castor  oil  in,  224 
cod-liver  oil  in,  217 
colocynth  in,  222 
confection  of  senna  in ,  223 
diet  in,  213,  217 
effect  of  habit  in,  217 
enemata  in,  220 
exercise  in,  214,  215 
hygienic  measures  in,  215 
hyoscyamus  in,  222 
liquorice  powder  in,  223 
manipulation  in,  254 
manna  in,  221,  222 
massage  in,  215 
natural  mineral  waters  in,  227 
nux  vomica  in,  231,  233 
podophyllin  in,  221,  223 
potassium  bicarbonate  in,  219 
prunes  and  senna  in,  217 
rhubarb  in,  223 
saline  purgatives  in,  212,  218 
sulphur  in,  224 
suppositories  in,  220 


INDEX. 


599 


Constipation,  treatment  of,  tamar  indien 
in,  222 
tamarinds  in,  221,  222 
with  Addison's  disease,  57 
with  anaemia,  47 
with  bronchial  asthma,  93 
with  cirrhosis  of  the  liver,  308 
with  congestion  of  the  liver,  308 
with  emphysema,  102 
witli  gastric  cancer,  192,  196,  197 

neuroses,  203 
with  gastritis,  acute,  163,  170 
with  influenza,  462 
with  intestinal  colic,  207 
with  jaundice,  289,  292 
with  lead  poisoning,  218 
with  meningitis,  416 
with  nephritis,  acute,  351 
with  osteo-arthritis,  463 
with  peritonitis,  acute,  260 
chronic,  267 
tuberculous,  268 
with  relapsing  fever,  459 
with  typhoid  fever,  449 
with  worms,  289,  292 
Convulsions  due  to  epilepsy,  383 
to  hysteria,  372,  375 
with  hydrophobia,  474 
with  influenza,  462 
with  lockjaw,  477 
with  malarial  fevers,  480 
with  measles,  436 
Copaiba  rash,  573 
Coryza,  acute,  59-63 
causes  of,  59 
symptoms  of,  59 
treatment  of,  aconite  in,  61 
alkaline  sprays  in,  62 
arsenic  in,  63 
belladonna  in,  62 
camphor  in,  61 
cocaine  in,  62 
diaphoretics  in,  60 
hygienic  measures  in,  60,  63 
inhalations  in,  63 
local  applications  in,  62 
opium  in,  60 
prophylactic  treatment  of, 

60_ 
quinine  in.  61,  63 
salicylates  in,  62 
with  influenza,  462 
with  measles,  434 
Cough,  reflex,  132-136 

cause  of,  abscess  of  liver,  134 
aneurism,  135 
appendicitis,  135 
chronic  gastric    irritation, 

134 
dyspepsia,  134 
gout,  136 
hysteria,  135 


Cough,  reflex,  cause  of,  inflammation  of 
the  pericardium,  135 
intestinal  irritants,  135 
liver  irritation,  134 
peritonitis,  135 
puberty,  135 
treatment  of,  alkalines  in,  136 
astringents  in,  133 
caustics  in,  133 
cocaine  in,  133 
emetics  in,  134 
gargles  in,  133 
gastric  sedatives  in,  134 
hygienic  measures  in,  135 
iodides  in,  136 
liquorice  in,  134 
mercurials  in,  135 
opiates  in,  135 
purgatives  in,  134,  135 
sedatives  in,  135 
sprays  in,  133 
surgical  measures  in,  131 
syrup  of  tolu  in,  134 

with  aneurism,  41,  43 

with  bronchitis,  acute,  84,  86 
chronic,  89,  133 

with  bronchorrhoea,  90 

with  emphysema,  99 

with  gastric  ulcer,  186 

with  influenza,  461,  462 

with  laryngitis,  67,  71,  74,  76 

with  measles,  437 

with  pleurisy,  124 

with  pneumonia,  118,  120 

with  pneumothorax,  131 

with  tuberculosis,  510-513 

with  valvular  lesions,  chronic,  24 

with  whooping-cough,  440 
Croup,  diphtheritic,  82 

treatment  of,  antitoxin  in,  82 
intubation  in,  82 
tracheotomy  in,  82 

false,  81,  82 

treatment  of,  apomorphine^in- 
jections  in,  82 
emetics  in,  82 
expectorants  in,  82 
Cystitis  with  albuminuria,  336 

with  diabetes  mellitus.  588 

with  phosphaturia,  327 

with  pyelitis,  343 


DEAFNESS  in  typhoid  fever,  454  _ 
Delirium  tremens    See  Alcoholism, 
with  erysipelas,  473 
with  hydrophobia,  474 
with  pernicious  malaria,  482 
with  relapsing  fever,  459 
with  typhoid  fever,  448 
with  typhus  fever,  458 
Dentition,  late,  due  to  rickets,  568 


600 


INDEX. 


Diabetes  insipidus,  577-579 
due  to  neuroses,  578 
symptom    of,    skin,     dry     and 
harsh,  578 
thirst,  578 

traces  of  sugar   and   albu- 
min, 578 
urine,    increased    quantity 
with  low  specific  gravity, 
578 
wasting,  578 
treatment  of,  antipyrin  in,  579 
arsenic  in,  579 
belladonna  in,  579 
bromides  in,  579 
cod-liver  oil  in,  579 
diet  in,  579 
electricity  in,  579 
ergot  in,  579 

hygienic  measures  in,  579 
mercuric  iodide  in,  579 
potassium  iodide  in,  579 
strychnine  in,  579 
turpentine  in,  579 
valerian  in,  578 
mellitus,  579-590 

complication  of,  cutaneous   affec- 
tions, 587 
balanitis,  587 
boils,  587 
carbuncles,  587 
eczema,  587 
gangrene,  587 
pruritus,  587 
treatment  of,  alkaline  and  bran 
baths  in,  587 
arsenious  acid  in,  587 
boric  acid  in,  587 
diet  in,  587 
eucalyptus  oil  in,  587 
lead  subacetate  in,  587 
opium  in,  587 
sodium  hypophosphite  in, 

587 
tonics  in,  587 
zinc  ointment  in,  587 
diabetic  coma,  588 

due  to  acetonsemia,  588 
due  to  lipsemia,  588 
due  to  toxsemia,  588 
due  to  uraemia,  588 
premonitory   symptom   of, 
dyspepsia,  588 
dyspnoea,  588 
fainting,  588 
headache,  588 
somnolence,  588 
weakness,  588 
treatment  of,  cod-liver  oil 
in,  588 
depletory    transfusion 
in,  589 


Diabetes  mellitus,  diabetic  coma  in,  treat- 
ment of,    hydrogen 
peroxide  in,  588 
intravenous     injection 

in,  588,  589 
oxygen  in,  588 
ozonic  ether  in,  588 
saline  solutions  in,  587 
sodium  hypophosphite 

in,  588 
transfusion  in,  589 
kidney  and  bladder  afi'ections,  587 
albuminuria,  586 
cystitis,  588 
renal  cirrhosis,  588 
lung  affections,  587 
gangrene,  587 
pneumonia,  587 
tuberculosis,  587 
treatment  of.  See  these  head- 
ings. 
nerve  affections,  590 

hypochondriasis,  590 
neuritis,  590 
paraplegia,  590 
retinitis,  590 

treatment  of.  See  these  head- 
ings. 
symptom  of,  appetite,  excessive, 
580 
cutaneous    irritation,    580, 

587 
eczema,  580,  587 
fatigue,  579 
irritability,  579 
lassitude,  579 
lumbar  pain,  580 
nervousness,  579    • 
neuralgia,  580 
thirst,  584 

urine,  high  specific  gravity, 
580,  581 
increased  quantity,  580 
sugar  present,  580,  581 
treatment   of,  alkaline   carbon- 
ates and  acetates  in,  586 
antipyretics  in,  586 
arsenii   bromidi   liquor  in, 

586 
arsenious  acid  in,  586 
bromides  in,  586 
cocaine  in,  586 
codeine  in,  584,  585 
dietary  for  separate  meals 

in,  583,  584 
diet  table  in,  582 
dietetic  treatment  in,  580- 

585 
gluten  bread  in,  581 
lactic  acid  in,  586 
lithium  in,  586 
morphine  in,  584,  585 


INDEX. 


601 


Diabetes   mellitus,    nerve   affections   in, 
treatment     of,      nervine 
tonics  in,  586 
nitroglycerin  in,  586 
opium  in,  584,  585 
quinine  in,  586 
salicylates  in,  586 
salicylic  acid  in,  586 
strychnine  in,  586 
uranium  nitrate  in,  586 
Diarrhea,  228-242 

due  to  chronic  enteritis,  229 
due  to  intestinal  catarrh,  229 
due  to  kidney  disease,  2i:8 
due  to  malignant  disease,  229 
due  to  neuroses,  228 
due  to  tuberculosis,  228 
due  to  typhoid  fever,  228 
treatment  of,  dependent  on  age,  228, 

229 
in  adults,  236-242 

associated  with  chronic  gastritis, 
238 
with  flatulence,  238 
with  intestinal  catarrh,  239 
due  to  alcoholism,  238 
due  to  cold,  239 

due  to  dysenteric  conditions,  240 
due  to  fermentation,  236 
due  to  heart  disease,  239 
due  to  hepatic  disease,  239 
due  to  lardaceous  disease,  240 
due  to  malignant  disease,  240 
due  to  prolonged   constipation, 

240 
due  to  tuberculosis,  240 
due  to  typhoid  fever,  237,  240 
treatment  of,  alum  in,  241 
antiseptics  in,  241 
astringents  in,  237,  240,  241 
belladonna  in,  241 
bismuth    preparations    in, 

238 
carminatives  in,  238 
catechu  in,  238 
chalk  mixture  in,  238 
cinchona  in,  238 
compound  tincture  of  cam- 
phor in,  239 
coto  bark  in,  238 
diet  in,  237,  241 
digitalis  in,  240 
enemata  in,  241 
hydrocyanic  acid  in,  239 
laxatives  in,  241 
logwood  in,  238 
mercurial  purgatives  in,  239 
nux  vomica  in,  239,  241 
opiates  in,  237,  239 
purgatives  in,  241 
salines  in,  239 
stimulants  in,  237,  240 


Diarrhoea  in  adults,  treatment  of,   stro- 
phanthus  in,  240 
tannin,  preparations  in,  241 
in  childhood,  233-236 

due  to  tuberculosis,  234 
due  to  typhoid  fever,  234 
due  to  unripe  food,  234 
treatment  of,  bismuth  prepara- 
tions in,  235 
castor  oil  in,  235 
catechu  in,  236 
chalk  preparations  in,  235 
diet  in,  235 

hot  fomentations  in,  236 
krameria  in,  236 
logwood  in,  235 
opium  in,  236 
rhubarb  in,  235 
in  infants,  228-233 

due  to  starchy  food,  229 
treatment  of,  bismuth  subnitrate 
in,  233 
carminatives  in,  233 
diet  in,  230,  231 
lime  water  in,  231 
liquor  potassse  in,  231 
meat  juice  in,  231 
mercury  in,  233 
milk,  pancreatized,  pepton- 
ized,   and   sterilized,  in, 
230,  231 
opium  in,  232 
resorcin  in,  233 
rhubarb  in,  233 
salol  in,  233 

sodium  bicarbonate  and  sali- 
cylate in,  233 
stimulants  in,  231 
warm  clothing  in,  232 
with  Addison's  disease,  57 
with  Asiatic  cholera,  483 
with  cirrhosis  of  the  kidney,  367 

of  the  liver,  303,  306,  308 
with  congestion  of  the  liver,  298 
with  diphtheria,  470 
with  gastritis,  acute,  168 
with  intestinal  colic,  207,  209 
with  nephritis,  chronic,  362 
with  peritonitis,  chronic,  267 

tuberculous,  268 
with  pernicious  anaemia,  50 
with  purpura,  573 
with  relapsing  fever,  459 
with  rickets,  570 
with  stomatitis,  gangrenous,  142 
with  trichinosis,  279 
with  tuberculosis,  502,  519-522 
with  typhoid  fever,  444,  451,  453 
with  worms,  271,  273 
Diet  tables  for  diabetes,  582-584 
Diphtheria,  463-471 

classes  of,  aural,  466 


602 


INDEX. 


Diphtheria,  classes  of,  laryngeal,  469 
nasal,  466 
pharyngeal,  466 
complication  of,  cardiac  collapse,  470 
diarrhoea,  470 
epistaxis,  470 

hemorrhage     from    alimentary 
canal,  bladder,  and  lung,  470 
pulmonary  symptoms,  470 
vomiting,  470 
constitutional  treatment  of,  antitoxin 
in,  425,  463,  467 
albuminuria  after,  468 
mode  of  administration, 

467 
rash  of,  468 
rheumatic  pains  after, 
468 
cardiac  stimulants  in,  464, 

466,  470 
emetics  in,  469 
feeding  with  nasal  tube  in, 

469 
hygienic  measures  in,  463 
liquid  food  in,  464 
perchloride  of  iron  in,  464 
phosphoric  acid  in,  464 
local  treatment  of,  alkaline  solutions 
in,  466 
antiseptics  in,  464 
chlorine  water  in,  466 
escharotics  in,  464 
ice  in,  464,  466 
indications  for  operation  in, 

469 
intubation  in,  467,  469 
irrigation  in,  466 
liquor  sodse  chlorinatse  in,  466 
local  sedatives  in,  464 
papain  in,  466 
paraffin  in,  466 
pepsin  in,  466 

peroxide  of  hydrogen  in,  466 
potassium  chlorate  in,  464 
quinine  in,  465 
resorcin  in,  466 
sprays  in,  466 

sulphur  insufflations  in,  466 
sulphurous  acid  in,  466 
tracheotomy  in,  467,  469 
sequelae  of  hsematuria,  331 

paralysis  of  diaphragm,  471 
of  intercostal  muscles,  471 
of  laryngeal  muscles,  470 
of  pharyngeal  muscles,  470 
of  soft  palate,  470 
pulse  variations,  471 
pyelitis,  343 
treatment  of  digitalis  in,  471 
electricity  in,  471 
nux  vomica  in,  471 
rest  in,  471 


Diphtheria,  treatment  of,  strophanthus 
in,  471 
strychnine  in,  471 
tonics  in,  471 
Diphtheritic   croup.     See   Croup,  diph- 
theritic. 
Dropsy,  treatment  of,  with  ansemia,  45^ 
47,  313,  314 
with  cancer  of  the  liver,  314 
with  cirrhosis  of  the  kidney,  371 
of  the  liver,  304,  305,  307, 
308 
with  hydrothorax,  127 
with  hypertrophy  of  the  heart, 

31 
with  lardaceous  disease  of  the 

liver,  317 
with  nephritis,  acute,  349,  351, 
355 
chronic,  359,  360 
scarlatinal,  356,  357 
with  pericarditis,  chronic,  19 
with  scurvy,  571 
with  smallpox,  429 
with  syphilitic   disease   of    the 

liver,  314 
with  valvular  lesions,  chronic, 
25 
Dysentery,  242-249 

associated  with  purpura,  248 
with  relapsing  fever,  459 
with  scurvy,  248 
due  to  impure  water,  243 
due  to  muscular  exertion  with  insuf- 
ficient food,  242 
due  to  septic  organisms,  243 
treatment  of,  aconite  in,  245 
alum  in,  247 

ammonium  carbonate  in,  249 
antiseptics  in,  247 
astringents  in,  248 
bael  fruit  in,  245 
baths  in,  246 

bismuth  carbonate  in,  245 
salicylate  in,  248,  249 
boric  solutions,  249 
calomel  in,  245,  248 
castor  oil  in,  248 
chloral  in,  249 
copper  sulphate  in,  249 
corrosive  sublimate  in,  247 
creosote  in,  247 
diet  in,  244,  246,  247,  249 
enemata  in,  243,  247 
eucalyptus  in,  247 
fomentations,     plasters,    and 

poultices  in,  247 
hsematinics  in,  248 
hygienic  measures  in,  247 
ice  in,  244 
iodine  in,  245 
ipecacuanha  in,  244,  245,246,249 


INDEX. 


603 


Dysentery,  treatment  of,  lead  acetate  in, 
247 

lemon  juice  in,  248 

magnesium  sulphate  in,  249 

morphine  in,  243 

naphthalin  in,  247 

opium  in,  243,  244,  245,  247 

potassium  bromide  in,  244 

purgatives  in,  248 

quinine  in,  246,  247,  249 

rest  in  bed  in,  243,  249 

salolin.  249 

silver  nitrate  in,  247,  249 

sodium  bicarbonate  in,  245 

stimulants  in,  246 
Dyspepsia,  160-165 
causes  of,  160-163 
due  to  Bright's  disease,  165 
due  to  chronic  lung  disease,  165 
due  to  gout,  164 
due  to  heart  disease,  165 
due  to  hepatic  disease,  165 
due  to  rheumatism,  164 
treatment  of,  alcohol  in,  162 

bismuth  preparations  in,  163 

calomel  in,  163 

calumba  in,  163 

charcoal  in,  164 

cinchona  in,  163 

diet  in,  161, 

exercise  in,  164 

gentian  in,  163 

hsematinics  in,  163 

hydrocyanic  acid  in,  163 

laxatives  in,  164 

mercurials  in,  164 

pepsin  in,  164 

quassia  in,  163 

saline  purgatives  in,  163,  165 

sodium  bicarbonate  in,  162 
with  Addison's  disease,  56 
with  ansemia,  47 

pernicious,  50 
with  angina  pectoris,  36 
with  bronchial  asthma,  93 
with  cancer   of  the   liver,   311,  313 
with  cirrhosis  of  the  kidney,  365 

of  the  liver,  303,  309 
with  congestion   of   the   liver,  296, 

297,  299 
with  cough,  134 
with  deposit  of  urates,  322 
with  diabetes  mellitus,  588 
with  dilatation  of  the  heart,  29 
with  flatulence,  163 
with  gastric  cancer,  191 

neuroses,  203 
with  gout,  547,  557 
with  headache,  398 
with  hysteria,  373 
with  insomnia,  401 
with  intestinal  colic,  204,  207 


Dyspepsia  with  jaundice,  290 

with  oesophagisraus,  144,  145 
with  oxaluria,  328,  330 
with  palpitation,  33,  34 
with  phosphaturia,  326 
with  rickets,  572 
with  tuberculosis,  523 
with  vomiting,  154 
with  whooping-cough,  443 

Dysphagia  with  aneurism,  40,  44 

with  laryngitis,  tubercular,  74,  76 

with  cesophagismus,  144 

with  stricture  of  the  oesophagus,  146 

Dyspnoea  with  aneurism,  44 

with  bronchial  asthma.  92,  93,  95 

with  bronchitis,  acute,  88 

with  cirrhosis  of  the  kidney,  368 

with  diabetes  mellitus,  588 

with  emphysema,  93,  99,  102 

with  fatty  degeneration,  31 

with  gout,  558 

with  influenza,  462 

with  laryngismus  stridulus,  79 

with  laryngitis,  acute,  70 

with  locomotor  ataxia,  390 

with  nephritis,  chronic,  359 

with  pericarditis,  acute,  17 

with  pneumonia,  118 

with  valvular  lesions,  chronic,  24,  27 


EAE,     inflammation     of    middle,     in 
measles.  436 
in  scarlet  fever,  434 
Eberth's  bacillus,  444 
Eczema  with  diabetes  mellitus,  580,  587 

with  gout,  558,  559 
Electrical  treatment  for  apoplexy,  414 
for  diabetes  insipidus,  580 
for  gastric  neuroses,  202 
for  osteo-arthritis,  565 
for  paralysis,  infantile,  391 

of  diphtheria,  470,  471 
for  rheumatism,  chronic,  540 
Emphysema,  98-103 
causes  of,  98 

symptoms  of  breathlessness,  101 
bronchial  catarrh,  101 
constipation,  102 
cough,  99 
dyspnoea,  99,  102 
flatulence,  102 
treatment  of,  cod  liver  oil  in,  101 
compressed  air  in,  101 
digitalis  in,  100 
dilute  sulphuric  acid  in,  100 
emetics  in,  100 
erythrol  tetranitrate  in,  100 
ether  in,  99 

expectorants  in,  99,  100 
heematinics  in,  101 
health  resorts  in,  101 


604 


INDEX. 


Empliysema,     treatment     of,     hygienic 
measures  in,  102 
inhalations  of  benzoin  in,  99 
of  conium  in,  99 
of  oxygen  in,  100 
of  turpentine  in,  99 
laxatives  in,  102 
nitrites  in,  99 
opiates  in,  99 
potassium  iodide  in,  102 
purgatives  in,  102 
solution  of  trinitrin  in,  100 
sprays,  alkaline  in,  103 
of  ipecacuanha  in,  103 
saline,  in,  103 
squill  in,  100 
strophanthus  in,  100 
tonics  in,  99,  100 
venesection  in,  100 
with  congestion  of  the  liver,  296 
with  gastritis,  chronic,  171 
with  nephritis,  acute,  355 

scarlatinal,  558 
with  reflex  cough,  133 
with  scarlet  fever,  434 
with  smallpox,  430 
Empyema,  127,  131 
causes  of,  127 

treatment  of,  aspiration  in,  128-131 
incision  in,  128-131 
irrigation   with   antiseptics  in, 

129 
resection  in,  128-131 
Endocarditis,  simple,  19-21 
causes  of,  19 
symptoms  of,  21 
treatment  of,  alkalies  in,  20 
blisters  in,  20 
diet  in,  20 
digitalis  in,  21 
iodides  in,  20 
opium  in,  21 
perchloride  of  iron  in,  20 
quinine  in,  20 
salicylates  in,  20 
stimulants  in,  21 
Endocarditis,  ulcerative,  21 
causes  of,  21 

treatment  of,  anti-streptococcic 
serum  in,  21 
perchloride  of  mercury  in, 

21 
quinine  in,  21 
salol  in,  21 

sodium  sulphocarbolate  in, 
21 
Enteralgia.     See  Colic,  intestinal. 
Enteric  fever.     See  Typhoid  fever. 
Enuresis,  376-379 
causes  of,  376 

treatment  of,  alkalies  in,  379 
belladonna  in,  378 


Enuresis,  treatment  of,  bromides  in,  379 
cod-liver  oil  in,  378 
nux  vomica  in,  379 
strychnine  in,  379 
surgical  measures  in,  377 
tonics  in,  378 
Epilepsy,  383-387 

due  to  dentition,  384 
due  to  injury,  384 
due  to  worms,  384 
symptom  of,  aura,  387 
convulsions,  383 
nocturnal  fits,  384 
unconsciousness,  383 
treatment  of,  amyl  nitrite  in,  384 
bromides  in,  385 
cannabis  indica  in,  386 
chloral  hydrate  in,  386 
diet  in,  384,  385 
nitroglycerin  in,  386 
protection  from  injury  in,  384 
surgical  measures  in,  385,  3S7 
zinc  compounds  in,  386 
Epistaxis,  67,  68 

treatment  of,  astringents  in,  68 
ergot  injections  in,  68 
galvano-cautery  in,  68 
insufflation  of  tannic  and  gallic 

acid  in,  67 
local  application  of  astringents 

in,  67 
plugging  the  nares  in,  67 
Epistaxis  with  cirrhosis  of  the  kidney, 
369  _ 
with  diphtheria,  470 
with  hsemophilia,  576 
with  purpura,  574 
with  smallpox,  430 
with  typhoid  fever,  444 
with  whooping-cough,  443 
Erysipelas,  471-473 

associated  with  alcoholism,  473 

with  chronic  kidney  disease,  473 
complication  of,  abscesses,  473 
laryngitis,  473 
pleurisy,  473 
pneumonia,  473 
due  to  the  streptococcus  erysipelatis, 

472 
symptom  of,  cardiac  failure,  473 
delirium,  473 
headache,  472 
pyrexia,  472 
treatment  of,  antiseptic  dressings  in, 
472 
collodion  in,  473 
diet  in,  472 

injection  of  carbolic  acid  in,  473 
of  perchloride  of  mercury 
in,  473 
local  application  of,    lead  sub- 
acetate  in,  472 


INDEX. 


605 


Erysipelas,   treatment  of,   local  applica- 
tion of  starch  in,  472 
zinc  oxide  in,  472 
purgatives  in,  472 
silver  nitrate  in,  472 
stimulants  in,  472,  473 
streptococcic  antitoxin  in,  473 
surgical  measures  in,  473 
tonics  in,  473 
Exercise,  use  of,  in  aneurism,  40 
in  bronchitis,  chronic,  92 
in  chlorosis,  49 
in  cirrhosis  of  the  kidney,  370 
in  congestion  of  the  liver,  298,  301 
in  constipation,  214 
in  emphysema,  102 
in  fatty  liver,  321 
in  gout,  subacute,  556 
in  headache,  401 
in  heart  disease,  30 
in  hysteria,  372 
in  jaundice,  chronic  obstructive,  292, 

295 
in  lithuria,  326 
in  nephritis,  chronic,  359 
in  oxaluria,  329 
in  pleurisy,  125 
in  rheumatism,  chronic,  544 
in  rickets,  567 
in  scurvy,  573 
in  tuberculosis,  496,  500 
Exophthalmic  goitre,  53-55 

symptom  of,  anaemia,  45,  53,  54 
asthenia,  54 
depression,  54 
enlargement  of  the  thyroid 

gland,  53 
irritability  of  temper,  54 
protrusion  of  the  eyeballs, 

53 
rapidity  of  pulse,  53 
treatment  of,  arsenic  in,  54 
belladonna  in,  54 
bromides  in,  54 
digitalis  in,  54 
electricity  in,  55 
hygienic  measures  in,  54 
ice  bag  in,  55 
iodides  in,  54 
Leiter's  tube  in,  55 
strophanthus  in,  54 
surgical  measures  in,  55 


FATTY  degeneration  of  the  heart.    See 
Heart,  fatty  degeneration  of. 
liver.      See  Liver,   fatty   degenera- 
tion of. 
Fevers,  infectious.   See  Specific  infectious 

fevers. 
Filaria  sanguinis  hominis,  334 
Flatulence  with  cancer  of  the  liver,  372 


Flatulence  with  cirrhosis  of  the  liver,  372 

with  diarrhoea,  238 

with  dysentery,  247 

with  dyspepsia,  164 

with  emphysema,  102 

with  gastric  cancer,  191, 192 
neuroses,  203 
ulcer,  183,  186 

with  hepatic  colic,  284 

with  peritonitis,  acute,  260 

with  tympanites,  226 
Fontanelle,  abnormal,  in  rickets,  568 


GALLSTONES,  280 
causes  of,  280 
description  of,  280 
symptom   of  passage   of,  cold   per- 
spiration, 281 
jaundice,  281 
low  pulse,  281 
muscular  spasm,  282 
pain,  281 
pallor,  281 

rise  of  temperature,  281 
vomiting,  281 
treatment  of,  manipulation  in,  287 
surgical  measures  in,  287 
Gangrene  of  the  lung,  121,  122 
causes  of,  121 

treatment  of,  antiseptics  in,  122 
cai'bolic  acid  in,  122 
diet  in,  122 
disinfectants  in,  121 
inhalations  of  chlorine  in, 
122 
of  eucalyptus  in,  122 
of  iodine  in,  122 
of  menthol  in,  122 
of  turpentine  in,  122 
oil  of  eucalyptus  in,  122 

of  peppermint  in,  122 
sprays  of  carbolic  acid  in, 
122 
of  creosote  in,  122 
of  eucalyptus  in,  122 
of  turpentine  in,  122 
surgical  measures  in,  121 
tonics  in,  122 
turpentine  in,  122 
with  diabetes  mellitus,  587 
with  embolism,  121 
with  smallpox,  430 
Gangrenous  stomatitis.     See  Stomatitis, 

gangrenous. 
Gastralgia.     See  Gastric  neuroses. 
Gastric  cancer.     See  Cancer  of  the  stom- 
ach, 
catarrh  in  scurvy,  572 

in  tuberculosis,  523 
crises  in  locomotor  ataxia,  387 
neuroses,  198-203 


606 


INDEX. 


Gastric  neuroses  associated  with  ansemia, 

198 
with  chlorosis,  198,  199 
with  hysteria,  198 
with  malaria,  201 
causes  of,  198 

symptom  of,  constipation,  203 
dyspepsia,  203 
flatulence,  203 
hyperacidity,  202 
pain,  198,  201 
perspiration,  198 
vomiting,  198,  201 
treatment   of,   aconite  liniment 

in,  200 
antispasmodics  in,  201 
arsenic  in,  201 
belladonna  in,  200 
carbolic  acid  in,  202 
carminatives  in,  203 
charcoal  in,  201 
creosote  in,  202 
diet  in,  199,  202,  203 
dilute  sulphurous  acid  in, 

202 
electricity  in,  202 
ether  in,  200 
hsematinics  in,  199,  200 
hydrocyanic   acid  in,  200, 

202 
hygienic  measures  in,  202 
massage  in,  202 
nux  vomica  in,  201 
pepsin  in,  202 
potash  in,  202 
potassium  iodide  in,  201 
poultices  and  fomentations 

in,  200 
purgatives  in,  203 
quinine  in,  201,  202 
resorcin  in,  201 
salol  in,  201 
sedatives  in,  200 
silver  in,  201 
sodium  bicarbonate  in,  200 

202 
strychnine  in,  201 
volatile  oils  in,  203 
Weir  Mitchell  treatment  in, 

202 
zinc  compounds  in,  201 
ulcer,  183-191 

symptom  of,  anaemia,  187 
collapse,  189,  190 
flatulence,  183,  186 
gastric  catarrh,  183 
hemorrhage,  183,  184,  188, 

189 
pain,  183,  184 
palpitation,  184 
perforation,  190,  191 
vomiting,  183,  184,  188 


Gastric  ulcer,  treatment  of,   alkalies  in, 
185,  186 
aloes  and  iron  pill  in,  187 
astringents  in,  187 
bismuth  salts  in,  186 
cocaine  in,  189 
diet  in,  184,  185,  186 
enemata  in,  188 
ergot  in,  187,  188 
fomentations  in,  190 
hsematinics  in,  186 
hydrocyanic  acid  in,  186 
ice  in,  185,  187 
lavage  in,  186 
laxatives  in,  186 
morphine  in,  187, 188,  189, 

190 
nutrient   enemata  in,   184, 

187,  190 
opium   in,   186,   188,  189, 

191 
pancreatic  emulsion  in,  185 
peptonizing  powders  in,  185 
picrotoxin  in,  188 
poultices  in,  191 
purgatives  in,  188 
rest  in  bed  in,  183,  191 
saline  purgatives  in,  186 
silver  nitrate  in,  190 
stimulants  in,  189 
surgical  measures  in,  190 
transfusion  in,  188 
Gastritis,  acute,  165-170 
causes  of,  165 

associated    with    enteritis, 
168 
symptom  of,  constipation,  170 
diarrhoea,  168 
pain,  166 
vomiting,  166 
treatment  of,   alkaline   carbon- 
ates in,  168 
apomorphine  in,  166 
astringents  in,  168 
calomel  in,  168 
diet  in,  168,  169 
emetics  in,  165 
gastric  sedatives  in,  167 
hydrocyanic  acid  in,  168 
ice  in,  166,  169 
lavage  in,  165 
Leiter's  tubes  in,  167 
nutrient  enemata  and  sup- 
positories in,  169 
oil  of  cajuput  in,  166 
opium  in,  167,  168 
plasters  and  fomentations, 

in,  166 
purgatives  in,  170 
salicylic  acid  in,  167 
salines  in,  166,  168,  170 
turpentine  in,  166 


INDEX. 


607 


Gastritis,  chronic,  170-182 
causes  of,  170,  171 
symptom  of,  diarrhoea,  178 
pain,  176 
vomiting,  176 
treatment  of,  acids  in,  177,  180 
alkalies  in,  177,  180 
alkaline  carbonates  in,  176 
aromatic  preparations    in, 

177 
bismuth  salts  in,  176 
bitter  tonics  in,  177 
creosote  in,  175 
emetics  in,  170 
gentian  in,  177 
hydrocyanic   acid  in,   177, 

179,  180 
lavage  in,  171-174 
magnesia  in,  178 
mineral  waters  in,  175,  177 
opium  in,  176 
pepsin  in,  179 
quinine  in,  179 
resorcin  in,  175 
salicylic  acid  in,  174,  178 
saline  purgatives  in,  175 

solutions  in,  174 
silver  nitrate  in,  176,  180 
sodium  bicarbonate  in,  177, 

178 
sodium  salicylate  in,  178 
thymol  in,  175 
Gastrodynia.     See  Gastric  neuroses. 
Gastro-intestinal  disorders  in  influenza, 

460 
Glands,  enlargement  of,  in  scarlet  fever, 
434.     See  also  Mumps  and  Diphtheria. 
Gluten  bread,  recipe  for,  581 
Glycosuria  due  to  gout,   559.     See  also 

Diabetes. 
Goitre,  52,  53 

symptom  of,  anaemia,  53 

enlargement     of    the     thyroid 
gland,  52 
treatment  of,  arsenic  in ,  53 
blisters  in,  53 
iodides  in,  52 
surgical  measures  in,  53 
exophthalmic.      See  Exophthalmic 
goitre. 
Gout,  546-565 

due  to  lead-poisoning,  212 
pathology  of,  546,  547 
relation  of  rheumatism  to,  529,  545 
urates,  biurates,  quadriurates  in  con- 
nection with,  54ii 
uric  acid  in  connection  with,  546 
Gout,  acute,  547-553 

symptom  of,  alterations  in  urine, 
548 
dyspepsia,  547 
mental  depression,  547 


Gout,  acute,  symptom  of,  pain,  547,  548 
rise  of  temperature,  548 
thirst  and  anorexia,  548 
treatment  of,  alkalies  in,  552 
alkaline  carbonates  in,  550 

lotions  in,  549 
atropine  in,  549 
belladonna  in,  549 
camphor  in,  549 
chloral  in,  550 
colchicum  in,  551,  558 
diet  in,  552 
euonymin  in,  549 
hyoscine  hydrobromide  in, 

550 
hyoscyamine    sulphate   in, 

550 
magnesium  sulphate  in,  549 
menthol  in,  549 
mineral  waters  in,  549 
morphine  in,  549 
opium  in,  549 
paraldehyde  in,  550 
podophyllum  in,  549 
potassium  bromide  in,  550 

citrate  in   551 
purgatives  in,  549 
salicylates  in,  550 
sedatives  in,  549 
sodium  salicylate  in,  551 
stimulants  in,  553 
trional  in,  550 
warm  fomentations  in,  548 
soothing  lotions  in,  548 
metastatic,  556,  557 

symptom  of,    cardiac,  as  pain, 
palpitation,  fainting,  557 
cerebral,  as  apoplexy,  men- 
ingitis, 557 
gastro-intestinal,  as  vomit- 
ing,   pain,    and   palpita- 
tion, 557 
treatment  of,  amyl  nitrite,  557 
calomel  in,  557 
croton  oil  in,  557 
digitalis  in,  557 
gastric  sedatives  in,  557 
leeches  in,  557 
strophanthus  in,  557 
trinitrin  in,  557 
venesection  in,  557 
rheumatic.    See  Osteo-arthritis. 
subacute  or  chronic,  553-556 

treatment  of,  alkaline  min- 
eral waters  in,  554, 
555 
camphor  in,  556 
colchicum  in,  553 
diet  in,  555 
diluents  in,  554 
exercise  in,  556 
guaiacum  in,  553,  554 


608 


INDEX. 


Gout,  subacute  or  chronic,  treatment  of, 
hot  air  in,  556 
laxatives  in,  554 
massage  in,  556 
passive  movements  in, 

556 
potassium   acetate    in, 
554 
citrate  in,  554 
iodide  in, 553, 556 
prophylactic  treatment 

in,  553,  556 
thermal  springs  in,  556, 

560 
vegetable  foods  in,  554 
with  bronchial  asthma,  94,  136 
with  bronchiectasis,  yl 
with  cirrhosis  of  the  kidney,  363  364 
with  cough,  136 
with  dyspepsia,  164 
with  headache,  401 
with  intestinal  colic,  204 
with  neuralgia,  393,  394 
with  oesophagismus,  144,  145 
Gouty  symptoms,  irregular,  557-560 

affecting  air  passages  and  lungs, 
as  asthma  and  bronchitis, 
557 
treatment   of,  expectorants 
in,  557 
potassium    iodide    in, 
557 
affecting    alimentary    tract,   as 
dyspepsia,  557 
treatment  of,  colchicum  in, 
557 
gastric  sedatives  in,  557 
guaiacum  in,  557 
potassium  iodide  in,  557 
affecting  the  circulatory  system, 
as  angina  and  palpitation, 
557,  558 
treatment  of,   amyl  nitrite 
in,  558 
colchicum,  558 
digitalis  in,  558 
guaiacum  in,  558 
magnesium      sulphate 

in,  558 
mercurial     purgatives 

in,  558 
nitroglycerin  in,  558 
potassium     iodide    in, 

558 
rest  in,  558 
strychnine  in,  558 
affecting     the     genito  -  urinary 

tract,  558 
affecting  the  nervous  system,  as 
migraine,  neuralgia,  neuritis, 
sciatica,  558.     See  these  head- 
ings. 


Gouty  symptoms  affecting  the   skin,  as 
carbuncles,  eczema,  her- 
pes,   prurigo,     pruritus, 
psoriasis,  urticaria,  558, 
559 
treatment   of,    alkalies   in, 
559 
alkaline  and  bran  baths 

in,  558 
colchicum  in,  559 
eucalyptus  in,  558 
guaiacum  in,  559 
laudanum  in,  559 
lead  subacetate  in,  559 
saline    purgatives    in, 

559 
sulphur      baths      and 

waters  in,  559 
zinc  oxide  in,  558 
irritability  and  uncertain  tem- 
per, 560 
treatment     of,     potassium 
bicarbonate  in,  560 
potassium  bromide  in, 
560 
producing  diabetes   and   glyco- 
suria, 559 
treatment  of,  diet  in,  559 
hepatic  stimulants  in, 
559 
Grippe,  la.     See  Influenza,  epidemic. 


H^MATUKIA,  330-333 
cause  of,  Bilharzia  hsematobia,  331 
cholera,  332 
cold,  331 
fevers,  331,  332 
haemophilia,  332 
injuries  to  the  skin,  331 
local  lesions,  330 
malaria,  332 
malignant  disease,  331 
purpura,  332 

renal  calculi,  330,  340,  341 
displacements,  330 
irritants,  331 
scurvy,  332 
syphilis,  331 
tubercle,  331 
vicarious,  332 
treatment  of,  alkalies  in,  332 
alum  in,  333 
diaphoretics  in,  332 
ergot  in,  332 
gallic  acid  in,  332 
hydragogue  purgatives  in,  332 
liquid  diet  in,  332 
morphine  in,  333 
narcotics  in,  333 
opiates  in,  333 
perch  loride  of  iron  in,  332 


INDEX. 


609 


Hsematuria,  treatment  of,  rest  in,  332 

surgical  measures  in,  333 

tannic  acid  in,  332 

vapor  baths  in,  332 
with  Asiatic  cholera,  486 
with  cirrhosis  of  the  kidney,  369 

of  the  liver,  303 
with  pernicious  malaria,  482 
with  scurvy,  571 
with  whooping-cough,  443 
Hsemoglobinuria,  333,  334 
paroxysmal,  333 

associated  with   shivering   fits, 
333 

due  to  malaria,  334 

due  to  syphilis,  334 
treatment  of,  dry  cupping  in,  334 

gallic  acid  in,  333 

hygienic  measures  in,  334 

iodine  in,  333 

mercurials  in,  334 

potassium  iodide  in,  334 

quinine  and  cinchona  in,  334 

rest  in,  333 

tonics  in,  334 

vapor  baths  in,  334 

venesection  in,  334 
toxic,  due  to  cold,  334 

due  to  exanthemata,  334 

hygienic  measures  in,  334 
with  pernicious  malaria,  483 
Hsemophilia,  575-577 

associated   with    arthi'itic    changes, 

576_ 
hereditary  character  of,  576 
tendency  to   hemorrhages   in,   575, 

576 
treatment  of,  alcohol  in,  576 

alum  in,  576 

application  of  styptics  in,  576 

arsenic  in,  577 

astringents  in,  576 

calcium  chloride  in,  577 

evaporating  lotions  in,  577 

ice  in,  576 

iron  in,  577 

plugging  the  nares  in,  577 

protective  care  in,  576 

recumbent  posture  in,  576,  577 

splints  in,  577 

tannic  or  gallic  acid  in,  576 

transfusion  in,  577 

venesection  in,  577 
Haemoptysis,  103-112 
causes  of,  103 
treatment  of,  amyl  nitrite  in,  109 

astringents  in,  107 

diet  in,  106 

digitalis  in,  109 

ergot  in,  106,  107 

hajmatinics  in,  108 

haemostatics  in,  106 


Haemoptysis,  treatment  of,  hamamelis  in, 
108 
ice  in,  105 
ipecacuanha  in,  109 
lead  acetate  in,  107 

and  opium  pill  in,  108 
Leiter's  tubes  in,  105 
morphine  in,  105,  106 
opium  in,  105 
purgatives  in,  108,  110 
pyrogallic  acid  in,  109 
rest  and  position  of  patient  in, 

103 
salt  in,  109 
stimulants  in,  106 
tannic  and  gallic  acid  in,  107 
turpentine  in,  108 
vapor  in,  106 
venesection  in,  110 
Haemoptysis  with    chronic   valvular  le- 
sions, 24 
with  tuberculosis,  489,  491 
Haff  kine's  inoculations  for  cholera,  483 
Hay  fever,  64-67 

causes  of,  64 
symptom  of,  anaemia,  65 
lachrymation,  57,  65 
paroxysmal    sneezing,    57, 
64,  65 
treatment  of,  belladonna  in,  65 
bromides  in,  65 
cocaine  in,  66,  67 
galvano-cautery  in,  66 
hygienic  measures  in,  65 
iodides  in,  65,  67 
nervine  tonics  in,  65 
quinine  in,  65,  66 
salicylic  acid  in,  66 
sprays  and  inhalations  in, 
66,  67 
Headache,  398-401 

associated  with  insomnia,  398 

with  migraine,  400 
cause  of,  anaemia,  398 

circulatory  disorders,  398 
digestive  disorders,  398 
febrile  affections,  398 
gout,  401 

kidney  disorders,  398 
nervous  disorders,  398 
ocular  disorders,  400 
typhoid  fever,  398 
treatment  of,  acetanilide  in,  400 
alkalies  in,  398 
bromides  in,  399 
caffeine  in,  400 
chloral  hydrate  in,  399 
gastric  sedatives  in,  398 
haematinics  in,  398 
hypnotics  in,  399 
muscular  exercise  in,  400 
nitroglycerin  in,  399 


39 


610 


INDEX. 


Headache,  treatment  of,  phenacetin  in, 
399 
phenazone  in,  400 
purgatives  in,  398,  401 
rest  in,  400 
salicylates  in,  400 
sedatives  in,  399 
strychnine  in,  400 
tonics  in,  398 
with   acute  yellow  atrophy  of  the 

liver,  317 
with  cirrhosis  of  the  kidney,  365 
with  constipation,  223 
with  diabetes  mellitus,  588 
with  erysipelas,  472 
with  hydronephrosis,  346 
with  hypertrophy  of  the  heart,  30 
with  influenza,  459,  461 
with  malarial  fevers,  481 
with  measles,  435 
with  nephritis,  acute,  349,  353 

scarlatinal,  359 
with  relapsing  fever,  459 
with  typhoid  fever,  444,  446,  449, 

454 
with  typhus  fever,  458 
with  valvular  lesions,  chronic,  27 
Health  resorts  for  anaemia,  47 

for  bronchitis,  chronic,  92 

for  cirrhosis  of  the  kidney,  364 

for  emphysema,  101 

for  gout,  556,  559,  560 

for  heart  disease,  30 

for  laryngitis,  72 

for  nephritis,  chronic,  363 

for  osteo-arthritis,  564,  565 

for  rheumatism,   chronic,   539, 

541,  543 
for  tuberculosis,  490-495 
Heart,  dilatation  of  the,  28,  29 
causes  of,  28 

symptom  of,  dyspepsia,  29 
treatment  of,  cardiac  tonics  in, 
29 
haematinics  in,  29 
sedatives  in,  29 
fatty  degeneration  of  the,  31-33 
causes  of,  31 

symptom  of,  dyspnoea,  31 
insomnia,  31 
pain,  31,  33 
treatment  of,  cardiac  tonics 
in,  33 
diet  in,  31,32 
hsematinics  in,  31 
hypnotics  in,  33 
iron  in,  33 
nux  vomica  in,  33 
stimulants  in,  32,  33 
strychnine  in,  33 
with  alcoholism,  409 
hypertrophy  of  the,  29-31 


Heart,  hypertrophy  of  the,  causes  of,  29 
symptom  of,  dropsy,  31 
headache,  30 
palpitation,  30 
treatment   of,   cardiac   depress- 
ants in,  30 
cardiac  tonics  in,  30 
hygienic  measures  in,  30 
Nauheim  treatment  in,  30 
Hemorrhage,  cerebral,  with  cirrhosis  of 
the  kidney,  369 
with  metastatic  gout,  557 
cutaneous,  with  acute  yellow  atrophy 
of  the  liver,  317 
with  haemophilia,  575-577 
with  scurvy,  573 
with  smallpox,  428 
with  whooping-cough,  441,  443 
gastric,  with  gastric  cancer,  192 

with  gastric  ulcer,  183,188,  189 
intestinal,  with  typhoid  fever,  445, 

451,  454 
retinal,  with  cirrhosis  of  the  kidney,' 
369 
Hemorrhages,    various,    in    diphtheria, 

369 
Hepatic  colic.     See  Colic,  hepatic. 
Herpes  due  to  gout,  558 
Hoarseness  and  aphonia,  77-79 
due  to  aneurism,  44,  78 
due  to  diphtheria,  78 
due  to  hysteria,  79,  375 
due  to  laryngitis,  acute,  69,  78 
chronic,  78 
syphilitic,  78 
tubercular,  78 
due  to  tumors  of  the  larynx,  78 
treatment  of,  astringent  gargles 
in,  78  _ 
atropine  in,  79 
belladonna  in,  79 
electricity  in,  79 
insufflations  and  sprays  in, 

78 
iodides  in,  78 
rest  of  the  voice  in,  78 
sedative  inhalations  in,  78 
silver  nitrate  in,  79 
Hodgkin's  disease.    See  Lymphadenoma. 
Hydatids  of  the  liver,  277,  278 

due  to  taenia  echinococcus,  277 
symptom  of,  emaciation,  278 
high  temperature,  278 
jaundice,  278 
rigors,  278 
tumor,  278 
treatment  of,  acetanilide  in,  278 
diet  in,  278 

potassium  iodide  in,  278 
quinine  in,  278 
sodium  chloride  in,  278 
surgical  measures  in,  278 


INDEX. 


611 


Hydronephrosis,  346-348 

due  to  impervious  ureter,  346 
due  to  obstruction  in  the  ureter,  346 
due  to  pelvic  tumors,  346 
symptom  of,  anorexia,  348 

diminution  of  urine,  346 

frequent  micturition,  346 

headache,  346 

pain,  346 

size  of  kidney,  346 

thirst,  348 

uraemia,  346 
treatment  of,  alkaline  draughts  in, 
348 

anodynes  in,  347 

diet  in,  348 

fomentations  in,  347 

glycerin  suppositories  and  ene- 
mata,  34y 

hydragogue  purgatives  in,  347 

ice  in,  348 

rest  in,  347 

surgical  measures  in,  347,  348 
with  albuminuria,  336 
Hydrophobia,  473-476 

symptom  of,  alteration  in  voice,  474 

coma,  474 

convulsions,  474 

delirium,  474 

depression,  473 

irritability,  473 

paralysis,  474 

pyrexia,  474 

spasm  of  the  larynx  and  oesoph- 
agus, 474 

syncope,  474 
treatment  of,  cautery  in,  474 

chloral  hydi-ate  in,  474 

chloroform  in,  475 

morphine  in,  475 

nutrient  enemata  in,  475 

Pasteur  treatment  in,  474,  475 

potassium  bromide  in,  474 

rest  in,  474 

silver  nitrate  in,  474 

spray  of  cocaine,  475 

Tizzoni's  extract  in,  476 

tracheotomy  in,  475 
Hydrothorax,  127 
causes  of,  127 
treatment  of,  aspiration  in,  127 

cardiac  tonics  in,  11^7 

diuretics  in,  127 

hydragogue  purgatives  in,  127 
wiih  cirrhosis  of  the  kidney,  371 
Hyperpyrexia  in  chorea,  383 
in  meningitis,  416 
in  pneumonia,  115 
in  rheumatic  fever,  537 
in  scarlet  fever,  432 
in  typhoid  fever,  445,  451 
Hypnotic  suggestion  for  neuralgia,  397 


Hysteria,  372-376 
causes  of,  372 
symptom  of,  aphonia,  375 

convulsions,  372,  375 

dyspepsia,  373 

emotional  disturbances,  372 

neurasthenia,  372,  374 

paralysis,  372,  375 
treatment  of,  ansesthetic  in,  375 

apomorphine  in,  375 

asafoetida  in,  374,  376 

asphyxiation  in,  376 

cold  water  in,  375 

diet  in,  374 

emetics  in,  375 

exercise  in,  372,  373 

hygienic  measures  in,  372 

laxatives  in,  374 

lobelia  in,  374 

quinine  in,  376 

tonics  in,  373 

valerianates  in,  374,  376 

Weir  Mitchell  treatment  in,  374 
with  aphonia,  79 
with  cough,  135 
with  gastric  neuroses,  198 
with  intestinal  colic,  209,  210 
with  oesophagismus,  144 
with  purpura,  574 


ICTERUS  neonatorum.     See  Jaundice, 
idiopathic. 
Imperial  drink,'  recipe  for,  350 
Incontinence,  nocturnal.     See  Enuresis. 
Infantile  paralysis,  390,  391 
cause  of,  390 

treatment  of,   cod-liver  oil  in, 
391 
diaphoretics  in,  391 
electricity  in,  391 
massage  in,  391 
mercurial  applications  in, 

391 
potassium  bromide  in,  391 

iodide  in,  391 
purgatives  in,  391 
rest  in,  391 

surgical  measures  in,  391 
tonics  in,  391 
Influenza,  epidemic,  460-462 

complications  of,  cerebral,  J460 
gastro-intestinal,  460, 
pulmonary,  460,  461,  462 
symptom  of,  constipation,  462 
cough,  461 
headache,  460,  462 
insomnia,  462 
lumbar  pain,  460 
mental  depression,  460 
palpitation,  460 
pyrexia,  460,  462 


612 


INDEX. 


Influenza,  epidemic,  treatment  of,  alcohol 
in,  460,  461 
astringents  in,  461 
diaphoretics  in,  461 
diuretics  in,  461 
expectorants  in,  461 
hydrobromic  acid  in,  461 
liquid  diet  in,  460 
morphine  in,  461 
paraldehyde  in,  461 
phenazone  in,  461 
purgatives  in,  461 
quinine  in,  461 
sedatives  in,  461 
sodium  salicylate  in,  461 
sulphonal  in,  461 
warm  clothing  in,  462 
wet  pack  and  tepid  spong- 
ing in,  461 
in  childhood,  462 

incubation  period,  462 
symptoms  of,  462 
treatment  of,  cocaine  in,  462 
eucalyptus  in,  462 
menthol  in,  462 
rectified  turpentine  solution 

in,  462 
salipyrin  in,  462 
Inoculation  for  cholera,  485 

for  diphtheria,   82,   425,  463,   467, 

471 
for  erysipelas,  473 
for  lockjaw,  477,  478 
for  malignant  disease,  425,  503 
for  plague,  425 
for  pneumonia,  425 
for  tuberculosis,  425,  503 

in  cattle,  525 
for  typhoid,  425 
Insomnia^  401-405 

due  to  alcoholism,  409 
due  to  chronic  renal  disease,  403 
due  to  deficient  circulation,  401 
due  to  delirium  tremens,  404,  405 
due  to  dyspepsia,  401 
due  to  errors  of  diet,  401 
due  to  febrile  attacks,  403 
due  to  meningitis,  416 
due  to  mental  strain  402 
due  to  neurasthenia,  403,  405 
due  to  organic  disease,  401 
due  to  pain.  402 

treatment  of,  bromides  in,  402,  403 
chloralamide  in,  405 
chloral  hydrate  in,  403 
chloroform  in,  405 
exercise  in,  402 
hot  drinks  in,  401 
hygienic  measures  in,  402 
hyoscine  in,  403 
injection  of  water  in,  405 
narcotics  in,  402,  403 


Insomnia,  treatment  of,  opiates  in,  402 
paraldehyde  in,  404,  405 
purgatives  in,  402 
sodium  bicarbonate  in,  402 

chloride  in,  405 
sulphonal in,  404 
tetronal  in,  405 
tobacco  in,  401 
trional  in,  405 
with  bronchitis,  acute,  86 
with  cirrhosis  of  the  kidney,  366 
with  diphtheria,  469 
with  fatty  degeneration,  31 
with  influenza,  461 
with  nephritis,  acute,  354 

chronic,  362 
with  osteo  arthritis,  561 
with  oxaluria,  329 
with  tuberculosis,  491,  512 
with  typhoid  fever,  447,  448,  454 
with  typhus  fever,  458 
with  worms,  271,  272 
Intermittent     malaria.       See    Malarial 

fevers. 
Intestinal  colic.     See  Colic,  intestinal, 
obstruction,  249-254 

due  to  abdominal  tumors,  253 
due    to    chronic    constipation, 

252,  254 
due  to  intussusception,  250 
due  to  malignant  disease,  250, 

251 
due  to  pelvic  tumors,  253 
symptom  of,  collapse,  250 
pain,  250,  251 
vomiting,  251 
treatment  of,  belladonna  in,  253 
compound  liquorice  powder 

in,  251 
confection  of  senna  in,  2d1 

of  sulphur  in,  251 
enemata  in,  252,  254 
hot  baths  in,  254 
hot   fomentations   in,    251, 

252 
injections  of  water  in,  251 
laxatives  in,  253 
manipulation  in,  254 
morphine  in,  250,  252 
opium  in,  252,  253 
purgatives  in,  253 
surgical   measures   in,    252 
253 
Intubation,  407,  469 
Intussusception,  250 

Irritability  due  to  diabetes  mellitus,  579 
due  to  gout,  560 


J 


AUNDICE,  acute  obstructive,  288-291 
associated    with    constipa- 
tion, 289 


INDEX. 


613 


Jaundice,    acute   obstructive,    associated 

with  dyspepsia,  290 

with   gastric    catarrh, 

•289 
witli  nausea,  289 
with  pain,  289 
with     vomiting,     289, 
290 
causes  of,  288 
treatment  of,  alkaline  solu- 
tions in,  290 
bismuth  in,  289 
calomel  in,  289 
diet  in,  289 
emetics  in,  290 
hydrocyanic    acid   in, 

289,  291 
irrigation  of  large  in- 
testine in,  ^90 
mineral  waters  in,  290 
poultices  and  fomenta- 
tions in,  290,  291 
saline    purgatives    in, 
289 
chronic  obstructive,  291-295 

associated  with  albuminu- 
ria, 294 
with  constipation,  292 
with     mental    depres- 
sion, 292 
with  pain,  291 
with  slow  pulse,  292 
treatment  of,  alkaline  solu- 
tions in,  295 
ammonium  bromidein, 

295 
cardiac  tonics  in,  295 
clothing  in,  293 
creosote  in,  294 
diet  in,  292,  295 
exercise  in,  292,  295 
guaiacol  in,  294 
nux  vomica  in,  295 
ox  bile  in,  293 
pilocarpine  nitrate  in, 

294 
quinine  in,  295 
saline  aperients  in,  293 
stimulants  in,  292 
surgical   measures   in, 

291 
warm  baths  and  packs 
in,  294 
idiopathic,  295 

malignant,  288 

cause  of  fatty  liver,  321 
with   acute   yellow   atrophy  of 

the  liver,  317 
with  cancer  of  the  liver,  312 
with  cirrhosis  of  the  liver,  307 
with  hydatids  of  the  liver,  278 
with  malarial  fevers,  483 


Jundice,  idiopathic,  with  passage  of  gall- 
stones, 281 

with  pernicious  anaemia,  50 

with  purpura,  573 

with  syphilitic  disease  of  the 
liver.  312 

with  valvular  lesions,  chronic,  24 


KIDNEY,   disease   of.     See   Nephritis 
and  cirrhosis  of  kidney, 
disease  with  diabetes  mellitus,  587 
with  erysipelas,  473 
with  lead  poisoning,  213 
with  scarlet  fever,  433 
Klebs-Loeffler  bacillus  in  diphtheria,  461 
Koumyss,  recipe  for,  498 


TAEDACEOUS   disease  of  the  liver, 
L  315-317 

due  to  chronic  suppuration, 

315 
symptom   of,   albuminuria, 
317 
cachexia,  316 
increase  in  size,  316 
treatment     of,    ammonium 
chloride  in,  317 
antiseptic  measures  in, 

316 
iodine  in,  317 
mercury  in,  316 
potassium  iodide  in,  316 
sea  air  in,  317 
surgical   measures    in, 
317 
Laryngismus  stridulus,  79-81 
causes  of,  79 
symptoms  of,  79 
treatment  of,  application  of  cold 
in,  80 
artificial  respiration  in,  80 
belladonna  in,  80 
bromides  in,  81 
chloral  hydrate  in,  81 
chloroform  in,  80 
cod-liver  oil  in,  81 
diet  in,  81 
emetics  in,  80 
morphine  in,  81 
nitrites  in,  80 
stimulants  in,  80 
warm  baths  in,  80 
with  rickets,  568,  570 
Laryngitis,  acute,  68-71 
causes  of,  68 

symptom  of,  aphonia,  68 
cough,  69 
dyspnoea,  70 
hoarseness,  68 
oedema  of  the  glottis,  71 


614 


INDEX. 


Laryngitis,  acute,  symptom  of,  pain,  69 
spasm,  70 
treatment  of,  alkalies  in,  69 
aperients  in,  69 
diaphoretics  in,  71 
emetics  in;  70 
expectorants  in,  69 
ice  bag  in,  71 
intubation  in,  71 
leeches  in,  70 
opium  in,  70,  71 
poultices  and  fomentations 

in,  69 
sprays  and  inhalations   in, 

69 
tracheotomy  in,  71 
chronic,  71-74 

causes  of,  71,  72 
symptoms  of,  71 
treatment  of,  health  resorts  for, 
72 
hygienic  measures  in,  72 
inhalations  of  benzoin  in,  74 

of  volatile  oils  in,  73 
insufflations     of    sedatives 

and  astringents  in,  74 
local  astringents  in,  73 
sprays   of    astringents   and 
alkalies  in,  74 
syphilitic,  77 

treatment  of,  anodynes  in,  77 
astringents  in,  77 
caustics  in,  77 
insufflations  in,  77 
mercury  in,  77 
potassium  iodide  in,  77 
sprays  in,  77 
surgical  measures  in,  77 
tubercular,  74-77 

symptom  of,  cough,  74,  76 
of  dysphagia,  74,  76 
of  pain,  74,  76 
treatment  of,  almond  oil  in,  76 
carbolic  acid  in,  75 
cocaine  in,  74,  76 
inhalation  of  alkalies  in,  75 
of  astringents  in,  75 
of  sedatives  in,  76 
insufflations  of  iodoform  in, 
76 
of  morphine  in,  76 
lactic  acid  in,  74,  76 
method  in,  76 
silver  nitrate  in,  75 
sprays  of  alkalies  in,  75 
of  cocaine  in,  76 
of    mercuric    chloride 
in,  77 
with  erysipelas,  473 
with  typlius  fever,  458 
Larynx,  oedema  of,  357 

spasm  of,  in  hydrophobia,  474 


Lavage,  171,  174,  193 

with  salicylic  acid,  174 
with  saline  solutions,  174 
Lead  colic.     See  Colic,  lead. 
Leucocythsemia,  51 
causes  of,  51 

symptom  of,  anaemia,  45,  51 
enlargement  of  spleen,  51 
hemorrhage,  51 
peritonitis,  51 
pleurisy,  51 
treatment  of,  arsenic  in,  51 
electricity  in,  51 
iodides  in,  51 
quinine  in,  51 
surgical  methods  in,  51 
Lithuria,  322-326 

causes  of,  322,  323 

symptom  of,  deposit  of  uric  acid  and 
urates,  322 
dyspepsia,  322 
uric  acid  gravel,  322,  325 
treatment  of  alkalies  in,  323 

alkaline  mineral  springs  in,  325 
aloin  in,  325 
bitter  tonics  in,  325 
calomel  in,  325 
cascara  sagrada  in,  325 
cold  baths  in,  326 
diet  in,  325 
exercise  in,  326 
laxatives  in,  325 
lithium  compounds  in,  324 
podophyllin  in,  325 
use  of  liquids  in,  323 
Liver,  abscess  of.     See   Abscess   of   the 
liver, 
acute  yellow  atrophy  of.     See  Acute 

yellow  atrophy  of  the  liver, 
cancer  of.     See  Cancer  of  the  liver, 
cirrhosis  of.      See  Cirrhosis  of  the 

liver, 
congestion  of  the,  296-301 
causes  of,  296,  297_ 
symptom  of,  constipation,  297 
diarrhoea,  298 
dyspepsia,  296,  298,  299 
increase  of  size,  296,  297 
mental  depression,  298 
muscular  lassitude,  298 
nausea  and  vomiting,  298 
pain,  296,  299 
pulsation,  296 
rise  of  temperature,  298 
treatment  of,   calomel   in,  300, 
301 
cascara  sagrada  in,  297,  301 
cold  baths  in,  301 
compound  colocynth  pill  in, 

297 
diet  in,  299,  301 
euonymin  in,  297,  300,  301 


INDEX. 


615 


Liver,  congestion  of  the,  treatment  of, 
exercise  in,  298,  301 
fomentations  in,  297,  299 
hydrocyanic  acid  in,  300 
leeches  in,  297,  299 
massage  in,  301 
mercurial  preparations  in, 

301 
mineral  waters  in,  299 
podophyllin  in,  300 
saline  and  alkaline  solutions 
in,  299,  300 
purgatives  in,  300,  301 
stimulant  expectorants  in, 
296 
fatty,  associated  with  alcoholism,  321 
with  ansemia,  321 
with  cachexia,  321 
with  general  obesity,  321 
with   malignant   jaundice, 

321 
with  phosphorus  poisoning, 

321 
with  phthisis,  321 
treatment  of,  diet  in,  321 
exercise  in,  321 
hydatids  of.     *S'ee   Hydatids  of  the 

liver, 
lardaceous   disease   of.     See  Larda- 

ceons  disease  of  the  liver, 
syphilitic  disease  of.     See  Syphilitic 
disease  of  the  liver. 
Lockjaw,  476-478 

symptom    of,    arrested    respiration, 
476 
cardiac  failure,  476 
convulsions,  476 
exhaustion,  477 
treatment  of,  antitoxin  in,  477,  478 
belladonna  in,  477 
Calabar  bean  in,  477 
cannabis  indica  in,  477 
chloral  hydrate  in,  477 
chloroform  in,  477 
cocaine  in,  477 
feeding  by  nasal  tube  in,  477 
morphine  in,  477 
nutrient  enemata  in,  477 
opium  in,  477 
potassium  bromide  in,  477 
quinine  in,  477 
strychnine  in,  477 
Locomotor  ataxia,  387-390 

due  to  syphilis,  387,  388 
symptom  of,  bladder  discomfort, 
390 
dyspnoea,  390 
gastric  crisis,  387 
lightning  pains,  387 
spasm  of  the  glottis,  390 
treatment   of,  amyl   nitrite  in, 
390 


Locomotor  ataxia,  treatment  of,  arsenic 
in,  388 
chloride  of  gold  in,  388 
chloroform  in,  390 
cocaine  in,  390 
counter-irritants  in,  389 
diet  in,  390 
ergot  in,  388 
fomentations  in,  389 
gastric  sedatives  in,  390 
hydropathic   measures    in, 

388 
morphine  in,  389 
perchloride  of  mercury  in, 

388 
physostigmine   extract  in, 

388 
potassium  iodide  in,  388 
rest  in,  389 
silver  nitrate  in,  388 
suspension  in,  389 
vapor   and  Turkish   baths 
in,  389 
Lumbago,  543 

Lung,    abscess   of.     See  Abscess  of  the 
lung, 
gangrene  of.     See  Gangrene  of  the 
lung. 
Lymphadenoma,  52 
causes  of,  52 

symptom  of,  anaemia,  45,  52 
bronchitis,  52 

enlargement     of     lymphatic 
glands,  52 
treatment  of,  arsenic  in,  52 
hygienic  measures  in,  52 
iodides  in,  52 
tonics  in,  52 


MALAEIAL  fevers,  478-483 
due  to  the  plasmodium  malarise, 

478 
intermittent  and  remittent,  479- 

482 
symptom  of,  anaemia,  483 
cachexia,  483 

cold  stage,  hot  stage,  sweat- 
ing stage,  482 
headache,  481 
jaundice,  482 
paroxysms,  480 
vomiting,  482 
treatment   of,    ammonium   ace- 
tate in,  482 
arsenious  acid  in,  480,  483 
change  of  air  in,  481,  483 
cooling  drinks  in,  481 
emetics  in,  481 
euchinine  in,  480 
hsematinics  in,  483 
hydrobromic  acid  in,  479 


616 


INDEX. 


Malarial  fevers,  treatment  of,  methylene- 
blue  in,  480 
potassium  bromide  in,  479 
purgatives  in,  479 
quinine  in,  480,  483 
sponging  with  tepid  or  cold 

water  in,  481 
syrup  of  hypophosphitesin, 

483 
Warburg's  tincture  in,  480 
pernicious  malaria,  482 

symptom  of,  asthenia,  482 
coma     and     delirium, 

482 
hsematuria,  482 
hsemoglobinuria,  483 
suppression   of    urine, 

482 
uraemia,  482 
vomiting,  482 
treatment  of,  astringents  in, 
483 
nutrient    enemata    in, 

482 
quinine  in,  482 
spirit  of  camphor  and 

ether  in,  482 
stimulants  in,  483 
with  congestion  of  the  liver,  297 
with  gastric  neuroses,  201 
with  hsematuria,  331 
with  hsemoglobinuria,  334 
with  nephritis,  chronic,  358 
with  neuralgia,  393 
with  vomiting,  155 
Malignant  jaundice,  288 
Massage  in  alcoholism,  406,  407 
in  chorea,  382 

in  congestion  of  the  liver,  301 
in  gastric  neuroses,  202 
in  gout,  subacute,  556 
in  hysteria,  374 
in  infantile  paralysis,  390 
in  osteo-arthritis,  564 
in  pernicious  anaemia,  51 
in  rheumatism,  chronic,  541 
in  scurvy,  573 
in  trichinosis,  279 
Measles,  434-437 

complication  of,  bronchitis,  436 
bronchopneumonia,  336 
convulsions,  436 
cough,  436 

inflammation  of  middle  ear,  436 
severe  headache,  436 
tubercular  changes,  436 
symptom  of,  catarrh,  434 
headache,  435 
photophobia,  435 
rise  of  temperature,  435 
sore  throat,  435 
vomiting,  435 


Measles,  treatment  of,  alkalies  in,  436 
ammonium  acetate  in,  435 
carbonate  in,  436 
chloride  in,  436 
demulcents  in,  435 
diaphoretics  in,  435,  436 
inhalations  of  benzoin  in,  436 
inunctions  of  olive  oil  and  car- 
bonic acid  in,  435 
ipecacuanha  wine  in,  435,  436 
isolation  in,  4.-i5 
liuctus  in,  436 
liquid  diet  in,  435 
liquorice  in,  435 
saline  solutions  in,  435 
spirit  of  chloroform  in,  436 
sprays  of  glycei-in  and  carbolic 

acid  in,  436 
steam  kettle  in,  436 
stimulating  applications  in,  436 
syrup  of  tolu  in,  436 
tonics  in,  437 
warm  baths  in,  436 
clothing  in,  435 

German,  437 

treatment  of,  tonics  in,  437 
with  albuminuria,  437 
with  pneumonia,  437 
Melsena  in  cirrhosis  of  the  kidney,  369 

of  the  liver,  303 
Meningitis,  415-418 

due  to  disease  of  bone,  415 

due  to  infectious  fevers,  415,  417 

due  to  syphilis,  415 

due  to  tuberculosis,  415 

due  to  ulcerative  endocarditis,  415 

symptom  of,  constipation,  416 
hyperpyrexia,  416 
insomnia  417 
rise  of  temperature,  417 
vomiting,  416 

treatment  of,  antipyretics  in,  416, 
417 
bromides  in,  416 
chloral  hydrate  in,  417 
cold  applications  in,  415,  416 
diet  in,  416 

evaporating  lotions  in,  416 
gastric  sedatives  in,  416 
glycerin  enemata  and  supposi- 
tories in,  416 
ice  in,  416 
leeches  in,  416 
magnesium  sulphate  in,  416 
mercurials  in,  415,  416,  417 
potassium  iodide  in,  416,  417 
rest  in,  415 

saline  purgatives  in,  415 
stimulants  in,  417 
surgical  measures  in,  417 
tepid  sponging  and   cold  baths 
in,  416 


INDEX. 


617 


Meningitis,  tubercular,  417,  418 

treatment  of,  mercury  in,  418 
potassium  iodide  in,  418 
surgical  measures  in,  418 
with  metastatic  gout,  557 
Mental  depression,    in   Asiatic  cholera, 
483 
in  cirrhosis  of  the  kidney,  364 
in  congestion  of  the  liver,  299 
in  gout,  547 
in  hydrophobia,  473 
in  influenza,  460 
in  jaundice,  chronic  obstructive, 

293 
in  osteo-arthritis,  561 
in  oxaluria,  328,  329 
in  phosphaturia,  326 
Micturition,  frequent,  in  cirrhosis  of  the 
kidney,  365 
in  hydronephrosis,  346 
in  nephritis,  acute,  349 
in  pyelitis,  343,  344 
Migraine,  400,  401.     See  Headache. 

due  to  gout,  558 
Morbilli.     See  Measles. 
Mumps,  437,  438 

associated  with  orchitis,  438 
symptom  of,  pain  in  parotid  gland, 
437 
rise  of  temperature,  437 
treatment  of,  diaphoretics  in,  437 
ice  bag  in,  438 
inunctions  in,  437 
leeches  in,  437 
liquid  diet  in,  438 
purgatives  in,  437 
rest  in  bed  in,  438 
stimulating  liniments  in,  437 
warm  applications  in,  437 
Muscular  weakness,  in  chronic  nephritis, 
362 
in  diabetes  mellitus,  588 
in  relapsing  fever,  459 
in  scurvy,  671 
in  typhoid  fever,  444 
Myelitis  cause  of  purpura,  574 
Myxcedema,  55,  56 
causes  of,  55 

symptom  of,  anaemia,  45,  55 
mental  failure,  55 
thickness  of  the  skin,  55 
treatment  of,  arsenic  in,  55 
diaphoretics  in,  55 
thyroid  extract  in,  55 


I^AUHEIM   treatment   for   heart  dis- 

x\      ease,  30 

Nausea  in  cancer  of  the  liver,  312,  313 
in  cirrhosis  of  the  liver,  303 
in  congestion  of  the  liver,  298 
in  gastric  cancer,  192 


Nausea  in  jaundice,  289 
in  nephritis,  acute,  347 
in  tuberculosis,  523 
in  typhoid  fever,  444 
Nephritis,  acute,  349-355 
causes  of,  349 

complications  of.  bronchitis,  355 
chronic  nephritis,  355 
empyema,  355 
enlargement   of    ventricle, 

355 
oedema  of  the  larynx,  355 
pericarditis,  355 
pleurisy,  355 
pneumonia,  355 
symptom  of,  albuminuria,  354 
ansemia,  355 
constipation,  351 
dropsy,  349,  351 
headache,  349,  353 
insomnia,  353 
nausea,  349 
thirst,  350 
ursemia,  354 
vomiting,  349 
treatment  of,  alkaline  diuretics 
in,  353 
astringents  in,  355 
bismuth  in,  354 
caffeine  in,  353 
croton  oil  in,  351 
diaphoretics   in,   351,  353, 

354 
diet  in,  349,  354 
digitalis  in,  353,  354 
diuretics  in,  351,  353 
draughts  of  water  in,  352 
ergot  in,  354 
hydragogue  purgatives  in, 

351,  353,  354 
hydrocyanic  acid  in,  354 
hygienic  measures  in,  354 
hyoscine  in,  354 
imperial  drink  in,  350 
lactate  of  strontium  in,  354 
leeches    and   poultices   in, 

355 
mercurials  in,  351 
persalts  of  iron  in,  354 
pilocarpine  in,  353 
rest  in,  350 
saline   purgatives   in,    351, 

354 
sedatives  in,  354 
strophanthus  in,  354,  355 
wet  pack  and  vapor  baths 

in,  352 
with  scarlet  fevei',  433 
chronic,  358-363 

due  to  acute  nephritis,  358 
due  to  chronic  suppuration,  358 
due  to  malaria,  358 


618 


INDEX. 


Nephritis,  chronic,  due  to  syphilis,  358 
symptom  of,  albuminuria,  359 
diminution  of  urine,  359 
dropsy,  359,  360 
uraemia,  362 
treatment  of,  alcohol  in,  359 
astringents  in,  360,  362 
baths  and  wet  packs  in,  360, 

361 
bromides  in,  362 
cardiac  tonics  in,  359,  362 
chloral  in,  362 
diaphoretics  in,   360,  361, 

362 
diet  in,  358,  359 
diuretics  in,  360,  361,  362 
ergot  in,  360 

erythrol  tetranitrate  in,  362 
exercise  in,  358 
expectorants  in,  362 
health  resorts  in,  363 
hydragogue  purgatives  in, 

360,  361 
hygienic  measures  in,  359, 

363 
hyoscine  in,  362 
imperial  drink  in,  359 
jalap  in,  361 
liquids  in,  359 
nitrites  in,  362 
nutrient  enemata  in,  362 
opium  in,  362 
pilocarpine  in,  361 
potassium  iodide  in,  359 
saline  solutions  in,  361 
scammony  in,  361 
tannic   and  gallic  acid  in, 
360 
scarlatinal,  355-358 

complication    of,    chronic     ne- 
phritis, 358 
empyema,  358 
purulent  pericarditis,  358 
due  to  cold  and  damp,  356 
due  to  constipation,  356 
symptom  of,  albuminuria,  356 
alterations  in  the  urine,  356 
headache,  356 
oedema,  356 
pain,  357 

pulse  changes,  357 
rise  of  temperature,  356 
ursemia,  357 
vomiting,  357 
treatment  of,  aconite  in,  357 
cardiac  tonics  in,  358 
diaphoretics  in,  357 
diet  in,  356,  357 
fomentations  in,  357 
laxatives  in,  356 
leeches  in,  357 
perchloride  of  iron  in,  358 


Nephritis,  scarlatina,  treatment  of,  qui- 
nine in,  358 
saline  purgatives  in,  358 
Neuralgia,  392-397 

due  to  anaemia,  392,  893 
due  to  chlorosis,  392 
due  to  gout,  393,  394 
due  to  malaria,  393 
due  to  nervous  exhaustion,  392 
due  to  neurasthenia,  392 
due  to  rheumatism,  393,  394 
due  to  syphilis,  393 
treatment  of,  aconite  in,  396 

acupuncture  in,  396 

alkalies  in,  393 

antipyretics  in,  393 

arsenic  in,  392 

belladonna  in,  395 

butyl  chloral  hydi-ate  in,  394 

caffeine  citrate  in,  394 

cannabis  indica  in,  394 

cimicifuga  in,  395 

cocaine  in,  396 

colchicum  in,  393 

counter-irritants  in,  396 

ether  in,  396 

exalgine  in,  394 

exercise  in,  393 

gelsemium  in,  394 

hsematinics  in,  392 

hygienic  measures  in,  392 

hypnotic  suggestions  in,  397 

ice  in,  396 

injection  of  water  in,  396 

iodides  in,  393 

menthol  in,  396 

mercurials  in,  393 

morphine  in,  396 

nitroglycerin  in,  394 

nux  vomica  in,  392,  395 

phosphorus  in,  395 

potassium  bromide  in,  394 

quinine  in,  392,  393,  395 

rest  in,  396 

salicylates  in,  393,  394 

strychnine  in,  392 

surgical  measures  in,  396,  397 

tonics  in,  393,  394 

valerianates  in,  395 

with  diabetes  mellitus,  586 

with  gout,  558 

with  intestinal  colic,  210 
Neurasthenia,  373.     See  Hysteria, 
cause  of  bronchial  asthma,  93 

of  hay  fever,  64 

of  insomnia   402,  405 

of  neuralgia,  392 

of  palpitation,  33 
Neuritis,  alcoholic,  406 

due  to  gout,  558 
Night-sweats  in  osteo-arthritis,  562 
in  tuberculosis,  514-517 


INDEX. 


619 


Nocturnal  incontinence.     See  Enuresis. 
Nordrach  treatment  of  tuberculosis,  500 


/rpDEMA.     See  Dropsy. 

vXj    OEsophagismus.     See  (Esophagus, 

spasm  of. 
Qllsophagitis,  acute,  142-144 

cause  of,  gastritis,  142 
irritant  poisons,  142 
pharyngitis,  142 
tonsillitis,  142 
treatment  of,  bismuth  prepara- 
tions in,  144 
cocaine  in,  143 
diet  in,  142 
enemata  in,  143 
ice  in,  143 
krameria  in,  143 
morphine  in,  143 
opium  in,  143 
CEsophagus,  organic  stricture  of,  146-153 
associated  with   malignant 
growths,  147 
with  syphilis,  147,  148 
with  tumors,  146,  147 
causes  of,  146 

symptom  of,  cachexia,  147 
dysphagia,  146 
pain,  148 
regurgitation  of  food, 

146,  148 
thirst,  151 

treatment  of,  arsenic  in,  148 
cocaine  in,  148,  150 
creosote  in,  148 
defihrinated  blood  in, 

152 
diet  in,  149,  150,  151, 

152 
feeding  in,  148,  149 
iced  drinks  in,  151 
morphine    and    opium 

in,  148,  150 
nutrient    enemata   in, 

149-152 
oesophageal  bougie  in, 

148 
potassium    iodide    in, 

148 
stimulants  in,  152 
surgical    measures   in, 

147,  149 
thymol  in,  148 

spasm  of,  144-146 

causes  of,  144,  145 
in  hydrophobia,  474 
symptom  of  dysphagia,  144 

pain,  144 
treatment   of,   ammonium   bro- 
mide in,  144 
asafcetida  in,  144 


(Esophagus,  spasm  of,  treatment  of,  bel- 
ladonna in,  145 
bismuth    preparations    in, 

145 
camphor  in,  145 
cocaine  in,  144,  146 
diet  in,  145 
morphine  in,  144 
musk  in,  145 

oesophageal  bougie  in,  145 
saline  purgatives  in,  145 
sodium  bicarbonate  in,  145 
valerian  in,  144 
zinc  compounds  in,  145 
Ophthalmia  in  relapsing  fever,  459 
Orchitis  in  mumps,  438 
Osteo-arthritis,  560-564 

associated  with  neuroses,  uterine  and 

ovarian  irregularities,  561,  562 
symptom  of,  anaemia,  562 
anorexia,  561 
constipation,  563 
deformity,  560 
depression,  561 
impaired  nutrition,  561 
insomnia,  561 
nervous  disorders,  561 
night-sweats,  562 
pain,  561 
pyrexia,  562 
treatment  of,  baths  in,  563,  564 
belladonna  in,  562 
blisters  in,  565 
cadmium  iodide  in,  565 
cautery  in,  564 
cod-liver  oil  in,  562 
electricitj'  in,  565 
iodine  in,  565 
iron  arsenate  in,  562 
laxatives  in,  563 
lead  iodide  in,  565 
massage  in,  564 
nux  vomica  in,  562 
potassium  iodide  in,  565 
quinine  in,  562 
strychnine     hydrochloride    in, 

562 
sulphuric  acid  in,  562 
tonics  in,  562 
Oxaluria,  328-330 

associated  with  dyspepsia,  328 
with  insomnia,  329 
with  mental  depression,  329 
causes  of,  328 

treatment  of,  alkalies  in,  330 
aloin  in,  329 
arsenic  in,  329 
cascara  sagrada  in,  329 
cold  baths  in,  329 
diet  in,  329 
euonymin  in,  329 
exercise  in,  329 


620 


INDEX. 


Oxaluria,  treatment  of,  hBematinics  in, 
330 

narcotics  in,  329 

nux  vomica  in,  329 

podophyllin  in,  329 

salines  in,  329 

sedatives  in,  329 

tonics  in,  329 
Oxygen,  inhalations  of,  in  diabetes  mel- 
litus,  588 

in  pneumonia,  117 


PAIN,  treatment  of,  in   aneurism,  41, 
43,  45 
in  appendicitis,  255 
in  Asiatic  cholera,  483,  486 
in  bronchitis,  acute,  85 
in  cancer  of  the  liver,  311 
in  congestion  of  the  liver,  296, 

299 
in  dysentery,  243,  244 
in  endocarditis,  21 
in  fatty  degeneration,  31 
in  gallstones,  280-287 
in  gastric  cancer,  192,  193,  194, 
196 

neuroses,  198-201 

ulcer,  184 
in  gastritis,  acute,  166 
in  gout,  548 
in  hsemophilia,  577 
in  hydronephrosis,  346 
in  influenza,  460 
in  intestinal  colic,  205 

obstruction,  250,  251 
in  jaundice,  290,  291 
in  laryngitis,  acute,  68,  69 

tubercular,  74,  75 
in  lead  poisoning,  211,  212 
in  locomotor  ataxia,  388 
in  meningitis,  416 
in  metastatic  gout,  557 
in  nephritis,  scarlatinal,  367 
in  ojsophagismus,  144 
in  oesophagus,  stricture  of,  148 
in  osteo-arthritis,  561 
in  perforation  in  typhoid  fever, 

455 
in  pericarditis,    acute,    17,    18, 
260,  261 

chronic,  19,  266 

tuberculous,  268 
in  peritonitis,  268 
in  pleurisy,  123 
in  pneumothorax,  131 
in  pyelitis,  343,  344 
in  relapsing  fever,  459 
in  renal  calculus,  341 
in  rheumatic  fever,  526 
in  rheumatism,     chronic,    540, 
543 


Pain,  treatment  of,  in  smallpox,  426 
in  stomatitis,  140 
in  syphilitic  disease  of  the  liver, 

314,  315 
in  trichinosis,  279 
in  tuberculosis,  523 
in  typhlitis    and    perityphlitis, 

259 
in  valvular  lesions,  chronic,  27 
Palpitation,  functional,  33,  34 
causes  of,  33 

treatment  of,  aperients  in,  34 
bromides  in,  33 
gastric  sedatives  in,  34 
hsematinics  in,  34 
with  Addison's  disease,  oi> 
with  ansemia,  45,  47 
with  endocarditis,  21 
with  gastric  ulcer,  184 
with  hypertrophy  of  the  heart,  29 
with  influenza,  460 
with  metastatic  gout,  557 
with  pericarditis  acute,  18 
with  valvular  lesions,  chronic,  22 
Paralysis  due  to  apoplexy,  411 
due  to  diphtheria,  470,  471 
due  to  hydrophobia,  474 
due  to  hysteria,  372,  375 
infantile.     See  Infantile  paralysis. 
Paraplegia  with  diabetes  mellitus,  590 
Parotitis,  epidemic.     See  Mumps. 
Peliosis  rheumatica,  574 
Pemphigoid  purpura,  574 
Perforation  in  appendicitis  255 
in  peritonitis,  acute,  260,  261 
in  typhoid  fever,  455 

symptom  of,  abdominal,  455 
collapse,  455 
fall  of  temperature,  455 
weakness  of  pulse,  455 
treatment  of,  morphine  in,  455 
opium  in,  455 
surgical  measures  in,  455 
Pericarditis,  acute,  17-19 

symptom  of,  dyspnoea,  17 
pain,  17,  18 
palpitation,  18 
rapidity  of  jsulse,  18 
treatment  of,  aspiration  in,  19 
blisters  in,  18 
chloral  hydrate  in,  18 
diet  in,  18 
hyoscine  in,  18 
ice  bag  in,  18 
iodine  in,  18 
leeches  in,  18 
opium  in,  18 
poultices  in,  18 
quinine  in,  18 
salicylates  in,  18 
stimulants  in,  38 
chronic,  19 


INDEX. 


621 


Pericarditis,      chronic,      symptom     of, 
dropsy,  19 
pain,  19 
treatment  of,  aspiration  in,  19 
diuretics  in,  19 
hydragogue  purgatives  in, 
19 
with  cirrhosis  of  the  kidney,  369 
with  nephritis,  acute,  354 

scarlatinal,  358 
with  rheumatism,  534,  538 
with  scarlet  fever,  434 
Peritonitis,  259-269 
acute,  general,  260 

due  to  Bright's  disease,  266, 

262 
due  to  cold,  260 
due  to  direct  injury,  260 
due  to  perforation,  260, 261, 
262 
symptom  of,  collapse,  265 
constipation,  260 
distention,  260 
flatulence,  260 
high  temperature,  260 
pain,  260,  261 
rapid  respiration,  260,  264 
thirst,  260,  264 
tympanites,  26.3 
vomiting,  262,  264 
treatment  of,  acid  drinks  in,  264 
calomel  in,  263 
camphor  in,  263 
carminatives  in,  263 
diet  in,  264 
enemata  in,  262,  264 
fomentations  and  poultices 

in,  261,  263 
hydrocyanic  acid  in,  262 
ice  in,  264 
leeches  in,  261 
magnesium  sulphate  in,  263 
morphine  in,  261,  262 
narcotics  in,  261 
nutrient  enemata   in,  261, 

262,  264 
opium  in,  261,  262,  263 
quinine  in,  262 
stimulants  in,  265 
chronic,  265-267 

symptom  of,  constipation,  267 
diarrhoea,  267 
effusion,  266 
pain,  266 
tympanites,  267 
treatment  of,  antispasmodics  in, 
267 
apocynum  in,  266 
aspiration  in,  266 
astringents  in,  267 
blisters  in,  266 
carminatives  in,  267 


Peritonitis,   chronic,   treatment  of,   diet 
in,  267 
diuretics  in,  266 
diuretin  in,  266 
enemata  in,  267 
hygienic  measures  in,  266 
iodine  in,  266 
opium  in,  267 
poultices  in,  266 
purgatives  in,  266 
salines  in,  267 
Scott's  dressing  in,  266 
sedatives  in,  267 
surgical  measures  in,  266 
tuberculous,  267-269 

symptom  of,  constipation,  268 
diarrhoea,  268 
distention,  267 
effusion,  268 
pain,  268 
treatment  of,  alum  in,  268 
astringents  in,  268 
carminatives  in,  268 
enemata  in,  268 
opium  in,  268 
purgatives  in,  268 
Scott's  dressing  in,  268 
surgical  measures  in,   268, 
269  _ 
with  appendicitis,  253 
with  cirrhosis  of  the  liver,  306 
with  leucocythsemia,  51 
with  svphilitic  disease  of  the  liver, 
315" 
Perityphlitis      See  Typhlitis. 
Pernicious  ansemia,  50,  51 

symptom  of,  ansemia,  45,  50 
asthenia,  50 
changes  in  urine,  50 
diarrhoea,  50 
dyspepsia,  50 
jaundice,  50 
treatment  of,  arsenic  in,  50 
bone-marrow  in,  50 
massage  in,  51 
malaria.     See  Malarial  fevers. 
Perspiration  in  malarial  fevers,  482 
in  tuberculosis.     See  Night-sweats, 
of  head,  in  rickets,  567 
Pertussis.     See  Whooping-cough. 
Phosphaturia,  326-328 

associated  with  dyspepsia  and  men- 
tal depression,  326 
causes  of,  326,  327  _ 
treatment  of,  alkalies  in,  327,  328 
boric  acid  in,  327 
buchu  in,  328 
diet  in,  328 

hydrocyanic  acid  in,  326 
juniper  in,  328 
nux  vomica  in,  326 
salicylates  in,  327 


622 


INDEX. 


Phosphaturia,  treatment  of,  santalin,  328 

silver  nitrate  in,  327 

surgical  measures  in,  327 

tonics  in,  326 

turpentine  in,  328 
Phosphorus  poisoning,  cause  of  fatty  de- 
generation, 31 
of  fatty  liver,  321 
Photophobia  with  measles,  435 
Phthisis.     See  Tuberculosis. 
Plague,  inoculation  for,  425 
Pleurisy,  122-127 

symptom  of,  cough,  124,  127 

effusion,  122 

pain,  122 
treatment  of,  alkalies  in,  124 

antipyretics  in,  124 

aspiration  in,  1 25 

blisters  in,  124 

bromides  in,  124 

calomel  in,  124 

chloral  hydrate  in,  124 

compresses,   fomentations,    and 
poultices  in,  123 

diuretics  in,  124 

hygienic  measures  in,  123 

ice  bag  in,  123 

iodine  in,  123,  124 

leeches  in,  123 

Leiter's  tubes  in,  123 

morphine  in,  123,  127 

narcotics  in,  1 24 

opium  in,  123 

plasters  and  bandages  in,  123 

saline  purgatives  in,  124 

Southey's  tubes  in,  126 

sulphonal  in,  1 24 
with  cirrhosis  of  the  kidney,  370 
with  erysipelas,  473 
with  leucocythsemia,  51 
with  nephritis,  acute,  355 
with  rheumatic  fever,  539 
with  scarlet  fever,  434 
with  typhus  fever,  458 
Pleurodynia,  543 
Pneumococcus  antitoxin,  425 
Pneumonia,  113-120 

conditions  of  attack,  113 
symptom  of,  cardiac  failure,  116 

cerebral  irritation,  119 

cough,  118,  120 

diarrhosa,  118 

dyspnoea,  117 

insomnia,  118,  119 

pain,  114 

vomiting,  118 
treatment  of,  alkaline  sprays  in,  118 

antipyretics  in,  115 

antitoxin  in,  425 

astringents  in,  118,  119 

blisters  in,  115 

cardiac  tonics  in,  117,  120 


Pneumonia,  treatment  of,  chloral  hydrate 
in,  118,  ]19 

cod-liver  oil  in,  120 

cold  pack  in,  116 

cold  sponging  in,  114 

counter-irritants  in,  119 

diaphoretics  in,  114 

diet  in,  119 

digitalis  in,  117,  119 

emetics  in,  117 

ether  in, 118 

expectorants  in,  115,  117,  118 

hygienic  measures  in,  113,  119 

ice  bag  in,  114 

iodine  in,  119 

leeches  in,  114 

morphine  in,  114,  118 

nux  vomica  in,  116 

opium  in,  118,  119 

oxygen  in, 117 

pilocarpine  in,  116 

poultices  and  fomentations  in, 
114 

purgatives  in,  114 

quinine  in,  114,  116,  119 

salines  in,  116,  118 

stimulants    in,    114,    116,    118, 
119,  120 

strophanthus  in,  117,  119 

strychnine  in,  116,  117,  119 

tonics  in,  119,  120 

venesection  in,  117 
with  alcoholism,  409 
with  cirrhosis  of  the  kidney,  370 
with  diabetes  mellitus,  587 
with  erysipelas,  473 
with  German  measles,  437 
with  influenza,  460,  461 
with  nephritis,  acute,  355 
with  pyelitis,  343 
with  rheumatic  fever,  538 
with  rickets,  570 
with  smallpox,  430 
with  typhus  fever,  458 
with  whooping-cough,  440,  442 
Pneumothorax,  131,  132 
causes  of,  131 
complications  of,  131 
symptom  of,  cough,  131 

pain,  131 
treatment  of,  morphine  in,  131 

opium  in,  132 

surgical  measures  in,  131 
Poisons,  irritant,  cause  of  acute  gastritis, 

165,  1(39 
Potteries,  lead  poisoning  in  the,  211 
Pregnancy,  vomiting  in.    See  Vomiting. 
Pruritus  due  to  diabetes  mellitus,  587 
Pulse  changes  after  diphtheria,  471 

in  chronic  obstructive  jaundice,  293 
in  congestion  of  the  liver,  297 
in  nephritis,  scarlatinal,  357 


INDEX. 


623 


Pulse  in  passage  of  gallstones,  281 

rapidity  in  exophthalmic  goitre,  53 

in  pericarditis,  acute,  18 

in  valvular  lesions,  chronic,  22 
in  smallpox,  427 
in  typhoid  fever,  445,  454,  455 
in  typhus  fever,  457 
Purpura,  573-575 
arthritic,  574 
cachectic,  573 

due  to  Bright's  disease,  573 

due  to  carcinoma,  573 

due  to  malnutrition,  573 

due  to  tuberculosis,  573 
hemorrhagica,  332 

with  dysentery,  248 
hemorrhagic,  574 
infectious,  573 

associated  with  malignant  endo- 
carditis, 573 
with  pyaemia,  573 
with  septicsemia,  573 
with  specific  fevers,  573 
mechanical,  573 

due  to  distention  of  vessels,  as 
in     epilepsy    or     whooping- 
cough,  574 
neurotic,  574 

due  to  hysteria,  574 

due  to  myelitis,  574 
symptomatic,  varieties  of,  573 
toxic,  573 

due  to  copaiba,  573 

due  to  drugs,  573 

due  to  jaundice,  573 

due  to  snake  bites,  573 
treatment  of,  arsenic  in,  575 

astringents  in,  575 

diet  in,  574 

ergot  in,  575 

hamamelis  in,  575 

ice  in,  574 

iron  in,  575 

lead  acetate  in,  575 

opium  in,  574 

quinine  in,  575 

strychnine  in,  575 

sulphuric  acid  in,  575 

tannic  and  gallic  acid  in,  575 

turpentine  in,  575 
Pyaemia,  cause  of  purpura,  573.    See  also 

Abscess  of  the  liver. 
Pyelitis,  343-346 

cause  of,  chronic  cystitis,  343 

diphtheria,  343 

gonorrhffial  infection,  343 

obstruction,  343 

pneumonia,  343 

retention  of  urine,  343 

scarlet  fever,  343 

smallpox,  343 

tuberculosis,  343 


Pyelitis,  cause  of,  typhoid,  343 

suppurative,  with  renal  calculus,  341 
symptom    of,   frequent   micturition, 
343,  344 

oscillations  of  temperature,  344 

pain,  343,  344 

pus  in  the  urine,  343 
treatment  of,  alkalies  in,  343 

alkaline  diuretics  in,  345 

ammonium  benzoate  in,  345 

astringents  in,  345 

boric  acid  in,  345 

cod-liver  oil  in,  345 

diet  in,  344,  345 

diluents  in,  343,  344 

dry  cupping  in,  344 

ferric  chloride  in,  345 

hygienic  measures  in,  344 

hyoscyamus  in,  345 

poultices  and  fomentations  in, 
344 

rest  in,  344 

salicylic  acid  in,  345 

warm  baths  in,  344 
with  albuminuria,  336 
Pyelo-nephritis,  344 
Pyonephrosis,  336,  344 
Pyrexia  in  cancer  of  the  liver,  313 
in  congestion  of  the  liver,  298 
in  erysipelas,  471 
in  gallstones,  281 
in  gout,  547 

in  hydatids  of  the  liver,  278 
in  hydrophobia,  474 
in  infantile  paralysis,  390 
in  influenza,  460,  462 
in  malarial  fevers,  481 
in  measles,  435 
in  mumps,  436 
in  nephritis  scarlatinal,  356 
in  osteo-arthritis,  562 
in  peritonitis,  acute,  260 
in  pneumonia,  113-116 
in  pyelitis,  344 
in  relapsing  fever,  459 
in  rheumatic  fever,  526 
in  scarlet  fever,  431,  432 
in  smallpox,  426,  429 
in  stomatitis,  gangrenous,  141 
in  trichinosis,  279 
in  tuberculosis,  491-517 
in  typhoid  fever,  451 
in  typhus  fever,  457 
in  whooping-cough,  439,  443 


RABIES.     A^ee  Hydrophobia. 
Relapsing  fever,  458-459 

complication  of,  dysentery,  459 
pulmonary  disorders,  459 
symptom  of,  constipation,  459 
delirium,  459 


624 


INDEX. 


Eelapsing  fever,  symptom  of,  diarrhoea, 
459 
enlarged  spleen,  459 
headache,  459 
ophthalmia,  459 
pain   in    the    hepatic   and 
lumbar  regions,  459 
in  muscles  and  joints, 
459 
recurrent    febrile    attacks, 

458 
suppression  of  urine,  459 
uraemia,  459 
weakness,  459 
treatment  of,  aperients  m,  459 
atropine  in,  459 
calomel  in,  459 
cold  applications  in,  459 
,  diaphoretics  in,  459 
diet  in,  459 
digitalis  in,  459 
ipecacuanha  in,  459 
iron  sulphate  in,  459 
isolation  in,  458 
leeches  in,  459 
opium  in,  459 
quinine  in,  459 
stimulants  in,  459 
vegetable     astringents    in, 

459 
warm  fomentations  in,  459 
Remittent  malaria.    See  Malarial  fevers. 
Renal  calculus,  339-343 

description  of,  339 
symptom  of,  gravel,  340 

heematuria,  331,  340,  341 
pain,  340,  341 
reflex  vomiting,  342 
suppurative  pyelitis,  341 
treatment  of,  alkalies  in,  342 
chloroform  in,  342 
diluents  in,  342 
mineral  waters  in,  342 
morphine  in,  341 
surgical  measures  in,  342 
venesection     and    cupping 
in,  342 
Retinitis,  diabetic,  590 
Rheumatic  fever,  526-539 

complication  of,  chorea,  538 
collapse,  537 
endocarditis,  534,  537 
hyperpyrexia,  536 
pericarditis,  534,  537 
pleurisy,  538 
pneumonia,  538 
symptom   of,   cardiac   changes, 
533 
pain,  526 
pyrexia,  526 
treatment  of,  alkalies  in,  533 
alkaline  draughts  in,  528 


Rheumatic  fever,  treatment  of,  anodynes 
and  narcotics  in,  538 
antipyretics  in,  536 
blisters  in,  536,  537 
cautery  in,  536 
cold  bath  and  sponging  in, 

537 
diet  in,  527 
digitalis  in,  538 
during  convalescence,  538 
diet  in,  538 
prophylactic  measures 

in,  539 
rest  in,  538 
stimulants  in,  539 
tonics  in,  539 
ice  in,  537 
injection  of  perchloride  of 

mercury  in,  536 
irrigation  and  drainage  of 

joints  in,  536 
laudanum  in,  535 
leeches  in,  537 
lemon  juice  in,  528 
mineral  waters  in,  530 
opium  in,  537 
potassium   bicarbonate   in, 

52,S,  533 
poultices  in,  537 
quinine  in,  528 
rest  in  bed  in,  527 
salicin  in,  528,  529 
salicylate  of  methyl  in,  535 
salicylates  in,  527,  528,  530, 

531,  532,  535 
salicylic  acid  in,  528,  529, 

535 
saline   purgatives   in,  528, 

534 
sodium  bicarbonate  in,  528 
chloride  in,  528 
salicylate  in,  528,  529, 
530,  532,  535 
stimulants  in,  538 
strophanthus  in,  538 
tonics  in,  538 
turpentine  in,  535 
gout.     See  Osteo-arthritis. 
pains,  with  antitoxin,  468 
with  haemophilia,  576 
Rheumatism,  chronic,  539-545 
articular,  540,  543 

treatment  of,  blisters  in,  540 
cascara  sagrada  in,  542 
chloroform  and  bella- 
donna in,  541 
and  opium  in,  541 
colchicum  in,'  542 
counter-irritants     in, 

540 
diet  in,  543 
electricity  in,  541 


INDEX. 


625 


Rheumatism,    chronic,    articular,    treat- 
ment  of,    euonymin 
in,  542 
exercise  in,  543 
guaiacum  in,  542 
health  resorts  in,  541, 

543 
hot  douche  in,  541 
hygienic   measures  in, 

543 
iodine  in,  543 
local  measures  in,  540 
massage  in,  541 
mercury   liniment   in, 

541 
Paquelin's  cautery  in, 

540 
passive  movements  in, 

540 
potassium  bicarbonate 
in,  542 
iodide  in,  540,  542 
sarsaparilla  in,  542 
sodium  iodide  in,  542 
stimulants  in,  542 
sulphur  in,  542 
tonics  in,  542 
muscular,  543,  545 

form  of,  lumbago,  543 
pleurodynia,  543 
torticollis,  543 
treatment     of,     compound 
ipecacuanha  powder 
in,  544 
counter-irritants     in, 

544 
dry  cupping  in,  544 
hot  bath  in,  544 
lithium  salts  in,  544 
local     application     of 

heat  in,  544 
narcotics  in,  544 
potassium   bicarbonate 

in,  544 
rest  in,  544 
stimulating    liniments 

in,  544 
warmth  in,  544 
relation  of  gout  to,  530,  544 
with  bronchial  asthma,  94 
with  chorea,  380,  381 
with  constipation,  224 
with  dyspepsia,  164 
with  endocarditis,  20 
with  intestinal  colic,  204 
with  neuralgia,  393,  394 
with  oesophagismus,  144 
with  pericarditis,  19 
with  purpura,  574 
Rhinitis  in  influenza,  462 
Rickets,  =  66-570 

associated  with  bronchitis,  568,  570 


Rickets  associated  with  deformities,  570 
with  diarrhoea,  570 
with  laryngismus  stridulus,  79, 

568,  570 
with  pneumonia,  570 
with  vomiting,  570 
with  whooping  cough,  570 
controlled  by   "  antenatal  therapeu- 
tics," 566 
due  to  bad  ventilation  and  lack  of 

sunlight,  566 
due  to  starchy  foods,  566 
due  to  syphilis   and   impoverished 

condition,  566 
symptom   of,    abnormal   fontanelle, 
568 
ansemia,  569 
disproportion    between   cranial 

and  facial  development,  568 
enlargement  of  wrists,  ankles, 
and  joints  of  ribs  with  costal 
cartilages,  567 
late  dentition,  567 
peevishness,  567 
perspiration  of  the  head,  567 
restlessness,  567 
treatment  of,  cod-liver  oil  in,  569 
diet  and  clothing  in,  568,  569 
exercise  in,  567 
expectorants  in,  570 
hsematinics  in,  569 
hygienic  measures  in,  567,  568 
hypophosphites  in,  569 
phosphates  in,  569 
potassium  bromide  in,  570 
tonics  in,  566,  570 
Rotheln.     See  Measles,  German. 
Round  worms.     See  Worms. 
Rubeola,     ^ee  Measles,  German. 


O  ALIVATION,  reflex,  in  scurvy,  572 
0     Scarlatina.     See  Scarlet  fever. 
Scarlatinal  nephritis.     See  Nephritis. 
Scarlet  fever,  431-434 

complication  of,  acute  nephritis, 
433 
arthritic  pains,  434 
chorea,  434 
empyema,  434 
endocarditis,  434 
glandular  enlargements,  433 
inflammation  of  middle  ear, 

433 
pericarditis,  434 
pleurisy,  434 
symptoms  of,  431,  433 
treatment  of,  acid  baths  in,  432 
aconite  in,  432 
antipyretics  in,  432 
antiseptic  gargles  in,  432 
borax  solutions  in,  434 


40 


626 


INDEX. 


Scarlet  fever,   treatment  of,  cold   rectal 
enemata  in,  432 
diet  in,  431,  433 
iced  water  in,  432 
inunctions  of  oil  and  gly- 
cerin, 434 
isolation  in,  432 
saline  purgatives  in,  431 
stimulating  diaphoretics  in, 

431 
surgical  measures  in,  434 
tonics  in,  434 

vapor  of  chloroform  in,  433 
warm  sponging  and  disin- 
fectant baths  in,  432,  433 
zinc  sulphate  in,  434 
Sciatica  due  to  gout.  558 
Scurvy,  571-573 

due  to  errors  of  diet,  571 
symptom  of,  anaemia,  571 
debility,  571 

deformities  of  rickets,  571 
dyspepsia,  572 
gastritis,  572 
hsematuria,  571 
hemorrhages,  571 
oedema  of  extremities,  571 
reflex  salivation,  572 
sponiiy  gums,  571 
treatment  of,  astringents  in,  571 
atropine  in,  572 
belladonna  in,  572 
catechu  in,  571 
chlorine  in,  572 
diet  in,  572 
ergot  in,  573 
gastric  sedatives  in,  572 
hsematinics  in,  573 
hamamelis  in,  573 
iodine  in,  572 
krameria  in,  571 
lemon  juice  in,  571 
massage  in,  573 
potassium  chlorate  in,  572 
quinine  in,  573 
silver  nitrate  in,  571 
with  dysentery,  248 
Sea-sickness,  156-159 

treatment  of,  amyl  nitrite  in,  159 
aperients  in,  157 
bromides  in,  157 
cerium  oxalate  in,  159 
chloral  hydrate  in,  158 
chlorobrom  in,  158 
chloroform  in,  158 
diet  in.  157 
ice  in,  158 
iodine  in,  159 
morphine  in,  158 
nitroglycerin  in,  159 
soda  water  in,  157,  158 
stimulants  in,  157,  158 


Serum  treatment   in    Addison's  disease, 
57,  58 

in  cholera,  425,  526 

in   diphtheria,   425,    463,    466, 
471 

in  diphtheritic  croup,  82 
I  in  erysipelas,  473 

j  in  lockjaw,  478 

in  malignant  disease,  425 
!  in  myxcedema,  55,  56 

j  in  plague,  425 

in  smallpox,  425 
I  in  tuberculosis,  425,  503,  525 

in  typhoid  fever,  424 
Smallpox,  425-430 

cause  of  purpura,  573 

pyelitis,  343 
complication  of,  abscesses,  430 

empyema,  430 

erysipelas,  430 

gangrene,  430 

oedema  of  throat,  429 

pneumonia,  430 

ulceration  of  cornea,  jnouth,  and 
fauces,  429 
symptom  of,  hemorrhage  from  skin, 
427,  428 

irritation  of  skin,  427 

lumbar  pain,  426 

rise  of  temperature,  426,  428 

sickness,  426 

weak  and  rapid  pulse,  427 
treatment  of,  antipyretics  in,  426 

antiseptics  in,  428,  429 

astringents  in,  428 

boric  acid  in,  429 

carbolic  acid  in,  429 
oil  in,  427,  429 

cardiac  tonics  in,  428 

cold  compresses  in,  428 

diaphoretics  in,  426 

diet  in,  429 

disinfectant  solutions  in,  427 

fomentations  in,  426,  428 

ice  and  tepid  sponging  in,  426 

morphine  in,  426 

oil  of  turpentine  in,  428 

olive  oil  in,  429,  430 

opium  in,  426,  429 

perchloride  of  iron  in,  427,  428 
mercury  in,  428 

potassium  permanganate  in,  429 

quinine  in,  427 

saline  purgatives  in,  426 

silver  nitrate  solution  in,  427 

stimulants  in,  427,  428.  430 

thymol  in,  428 

tonics  in,  429,  430 

tracheotomy  in,  429 

vaccination  in,  425 

volatile  disinfectants  in,  426 

warm  baths  in,  427,  430 


INDEX. 


627 


Specific  infectious  diseases,  419-425 

general    management    of, 
419-425 
convalescence,  422 
disinfectants,  421 
isolation,  421 
prescriptions   for   dia- 
phoretics and  salines, 
422,  423 
treatment    of,    anticholera 
inoculation  in,  425 
antitoxin  in,  423 
anti-typhoid     vaccina- 
tion in,  424 
Coley's  fluid  in,  425 
diphtheria      antitoxin 

in.  425 
Koch's  tuberculin   in, 

425 
plague  inoculation  in, 

425 
pneumococcus  antitox- 
in in,  425 
streptococcus  antitoxin 

in,  425 
vaccines  in,  424 
with  albuminuria,  337 
with  anaemia,  171 
with  emphysema,  127 
with  endocarditis,  19 
with  hsematuria,  331 
with  meningitis,  415 
Avith  pleurisy,  125 
with  purpura,  573 
with  pyelitis,  343 
Spleen,    enlargement    of,     in    relapsing 

fever,  459 
Stomatitis,  139-141 

associated  with  dentition,  140 
due  to  mercury  or  iodine,  140 
symptom  of,  anorexia,  140 

pain,  140 
treatment  of,  astringents  in,  140 
chlorine  water  in,  141 
cinchona  in,  140 
Condy's  fluid  in,  141 
potassium  chlorate  in,  140 
rhatany  in,  140 
Stomatitis,  aphthous,  or  thrush,  132,  139 
due  to  oidium  albicans,  137 
feeding-bottles,    rules   concern- 
ing, 137,  138 
treatment  of,  alum  in,  139 

borax,  glycerin  of,  in,  138 
honey  in,  138 
powdered,  with  sugar, 
in,  138 
caustics  in,  138 
potassium  chlorate  in,  139 
quinine  and  iron  in,  139 
sterilized  milk  in,  139 
stimulants  in,  139 


Stomatitis,  gangrenous,  141,  142 

symptom  of,  diarrhoea,  142 

pyrexia,  141 
treatment  of,  ammonium  in,  142 
antiseptics  and  disinfectants 

in,  141 
caustics  in,  141 
cautery  in,  141 
chloroform  in,  141 
cinchona  in,  142 
diet  in,  141 
hsematinics  in,  142 
mercuric  chloride  in,  141 
nitric  acid  in,  141 
potassium  chlorate  in,  142 
surgical  measures  in,  141 
tonics  in,  141 
Streptococcus  antitoxin,  425 
Sugar  in  urine  of  diabetes  insipidus,  578 

mellitus,  579,  580 
Suppurative  pylephlebitis.     See  Abscess 

of  the  liver. 
Suprarenal  extract  in  Addison's  disease, 

57,  58 
Syncope  and  collapse,   37-39.     See  also 
Collapse, 
causes  of,  37 
treatment  of,  38,  39 
Syphilis,  40 

cause  of  aneurism,  40 
of  apoplexy,  413 
of  catarrh,  chronic  nasal,  63,  64 
of  cirrhosis  of  the  kidney,  363 

of  the  liver,  309 
of  hsematuria,  331 
of  hsemoglobinuria,  334 
of  lardaceous     disease    of    the 

liver,  316 
of  laryngitis,  chronic,  72,  77 
of  locomotor  ataxia,  387,  388 
of  meningitis,  415 
of  neuralgia,  393 
of  oesophageal  stricture,  147 
of  rickets,  566 
Syphilitic  disease  of  the  liver,  314,  315 
symptoms  of,  314,  315 
ti'eatment  of,  314,  315 
Syphilitic  laryngitis.     See  Laryngitis. 


TJSNIA   echinococcus.     See  Hydatids 
of  the  liver. 
Tallerman  treatment  for  osteo-arthritis, 
563 
for  subacute  gout,  556 
Tape  worms.     See  Worms. 
Tetanus.     See  Lockjaw. 
Thrush.     See  Aphthous  stomatitis. 
Thyroid  extract  in  myxoedema,  55,  56 
gland,  atrophy  of.    See  Myxoedema. 
enlargement  of.    See  (ioitre  and 
exophthalmic  goitre. 


628 


INDEX. 


Tonsillitis  cause  of  hsematuria,  331 
Torticollis,  543 

Tossemia  cause  of  diabetic  coma,  588 
Tracheotomy  in  diphtheria,  467,  469 

in  hydrophobia,  475 
Transfusion  in  diabetes  mellitus,  589 
in  gastric  ulcer,  189 
in  hsemophilia,  577 
Trichina  spiralis.     See  Trichinosis. 
Trichinosis,  279 

due  to  the  trichina  spiralis  in   in- 
fected pork,  279 
symptom  of,  anorexia,  279 
diarrhcea,  279 
high  temperature,  279 
pain,  279 
vomiting,  279 
treatment  of,  acetanilide  in,  279 
antipyrine  in,  279 
emetics  in,  279 
gymnastic  exercises  in,  279 
massage  in,  279 
stimulants  in,  279 
Turkish  baths  in,  279 
Tubercular  laryngitis.     See  Laryngitis, 
meningitis.     See  Meningitis,  tuber- 
cular. 
Tuberculin,  425,  503,  525 
Tuberculosis,  487-525 

affecting  bones  and  joints,  487,  524 

_  lung,  488,  524 
bacillary  origin  of,  488 
hereditary  predisposition  to,  488 
prevention  of  infection  of,  through 
meat,  525 
through  milk,  525 
through  sputa,  525 
testing  cattle  with  tuberculin  for,  525 
Tuberculosis,  general  treatment  of,  anti 
septics  in,  508 
by  inhalation,  508 
by  inunction,  508 
by  laryngeal  injection, 

509 
by  spray,  508 
by  tracheal   injection, 
"509 
arsenic  in,  506 
camphor  in,  509 
cocaine  in,  509 
cod-liver  oil  in,  499,  500 
creosote  in,  499,  503,  505 
diet  in,  497,  498,  499,  524 
digestives  in,  495 
exercise  in,  496,  500 
guaiacol  in,  499,  504,  505 
hsematinics  in,  507 
health  resorts,  African,  493 
Alpine,  491,  492 
American,  492 
Australian,      491, 
492 


Tuberculosis,  general  treatment  of,  health 
resorts,     Egyp- 
tian, 493 
English,  494 
European,   south, 

491,  492 
mountain  air,  con- 
ditions preclud- 
ing, 490,  492 
liypophosphites  in,  499,  502 
Koch's  tuberculin  in,  503 
koumyss  in,  497 
malt  in,  501,  502 
menthol  in,  509 
mercurials  in,  507 
Nordrach  treatment  in,  500 
open-air  treatment  in,  489, 

494,  495,  524 
overfeeding   with   oesopha- 
geal tube  in,  498 
pancreatic  emulsions  in,  502 
purgatives  in,  495 
rest  in,  500 
stimulants  in,  499 
sulphur  in,  506 
sulphuretted   hydrogen  in, 

506 
warm  clothing  in,  497 
Tuberculosis,  symptomatic  treatment  of, 
510-524 
cough,  treatment  of,  ammonium  ace- 
tate in,  511 
antiseptics  in,  512 
belladonna  in,  512,  513 
butyl  chloral  in,  512 
codeine  in,  511 
cod-liver  oil  in,  512 
demulcents  in,  510 
hydrocyanic  acid  in,  511 
inhalations  of  aqua  lauro- 
cerasi  in,  513 
of  benzoin  in,  511 
of  conium  juice  in,  513 
of  guaiacol  in,  511 
of  hydrocyanic  acid  in, 
513 
of  turpentine  in,  511 
iodine  in,  513 
ipecacuanha  in,  512 
morphine  in,  512 
opium  in,  512 
plasters  in,  513 
potassium  bromide  in,  512 
citrate  in,  511 
iodide  in,  512 
saline  mineral  waters  in,  511 
sedative    and    counter-irri- 
tant liniments  in,  513 
sedatives  in,  510,  511 
sprays  of  cocaine  or  opium 

in,  513 
steam  spray  in,  511 


INDEX. 


629 


Tuberculosis  diarrhoea,  causes  of,  519-522 
treatment  of,  alum  in,  520 
bismuth  in,  519 

subnitrate  in,  519 
castor  oil  in,  519 
copper  sulphate  in,  520 
coto  in,  521 

enemata  with  opium  in,  522 
gallic  acid  in,  520 
lead  acetate  in,  520 
opium  in,  520 
salicylate  in,  519 
stimulants  in,  521 
suppositories  of  lead  in,  522 
of  morphine  in,  522 
of  opium  in,  522 
of  tannic  acid  in,  522 
tannic  acid  in,  521 
tannin  in,  520 
gastric  symptom  of,  anorexia,  522 

treatment  of,  change  of  air 
in,  522 
tonics  in,  522 
catarrh,  522 

treatment  of,  523 
vomiting,  523 

treatment  of,  523,  524 
night- sweats,   associated   with  great 
oscillations    of    temperature, 
515 
treatment  of,  514-517 
acetic  acid  in,  516 
agaric  acid  or  agaricin  in, 

517 
alum  in,  516 
aromatic  sulphuric  acid  in, 

563 
astringents  in,  515 
atropine  in,  516 
belladonna  in,  516 
calcium  hypo  phosphite  in, 

515 
copper  sulphate  and  opium 

in,  515 
coto  and  cotoin  in,  517 
digitalis  in,  515 
jaborandi  in,  516 
lead  and  opium  pill  in,  515 
open-air  treatment  in,  515 
picrotoxin  in,  516 
pilocarpine  in,  516 
quinine  in,  515 
strychnine  in,  515 
sulphuric  acid  in,  516 
tannic  and  gallic   acid  in, 
516 
pyrexia,  treatment  of,    antipyretics 
in,  518 
antiseptics  in,  517 
digitalis  in,  518 
quinine  in,  518 
salicylates  in,  518 


Tuberculosis     pyrexia,     treatment     of, 
sponging  and  wet  pack  in,  518 
vomiting,  reflex  or  mechanical,  due 
to  bronchial  catarrh,  514 
treatment  of,  513,  514 
with  congestion  of  the  liver,  296 
with  diabetes  mellitus,  587 
with  diarrhoea,  228,  234,  240 
with  dyspepsia,  164 
with  endocarditis,  19 
with  fatty  liver,  321 
with  gangrene  of  the  lung,  121 
with  gastritis,  chronic,  171 
with  hsematuria,  331 
with  haemoptysis,  490,  491 
with  influenza,  460,  462 
with  lardaceous  disease  of  the  liver, 

315 
with  laryngitis,  chronic,  72,  74-77 
with  measles,  436 
with  meningitis,  415 
with  pneumothorax,  132 
with  purpura,  573 
with  pyelitis,  343 
Tympanites,  226,  227 

due  to  chronic  constipation,  226 
due  to  chronic  dyspepsia,  226 
due  to  obstruction,  226 
due  to  peritonitis,  226 
treatment  of,  carminatives  in,  227 
enemata  of  turpentine  in,  226 
laxatives  in,  226 
purgatives  in,  226 
removal  of  flatulence  in,  226 
surgical  measures  in,  227 
with  peritonitis,  acute,  263 
chronic,  267 
Typhlitis  and  perityphlitis,  258,  259 

associated    with   general   peri- 
tonitis, 259 
treatment  of,  belladonna  in,  259 
enemata  in,  259 
hot  fomentations  in,  259 
opium  in,  259 
saline  purgatives  in,  259 
Typhoid  fever,  444-456 

complication  of,  cardiac   weak- 
ness, 444,  454,  456 
collapse,  38,  452,  454,  455 
hsematuria,  331 
hyperpyrexia,  444,  451 
intestinal  hemorrhage,  444 
perforation,  444,  451,  455 
protracted  diarrhoea,  482 
pyelitis,  343 

secondary  congestion,  444 
convalescence  from,  456 
due  to  Eberth's  bacillus,  444 
inoculation  for,  425 
symptom  of,  constipation,  449 
deafness,  454 
delirium  (coma  vigil),  448 


630 


INDEX. 


Typhoid   fever,  symptom   of,  diarrhoea, 
228, 237,  240,  445 
epistaxis,  444 
headache,  898, 444,  449, 454 
nausea,  444 
oscilhitions  of  temperature, 

447 
pyrexia,  451 
rose-colored  rash,  444 
sleeplessness,  448,  454 
tympanic  distention,  444 
weakness,  444 
treatment  of,  antiseptics  in,  449 
asaprol in,  450 
benzoin  in,  450 
chlorine  water  in,  449 
cold  applications  in,  451 
diaphoretics  in  449 
diet  in,  44(i,  453 
disinfectants  in,  446 
diuretics  in,  449 
hygienic  measures  in,  445 
quinine  in,  450 
saline  purgatives  in,  449 
saloi  in,  449 
stimulants  in,  447-456 
treatment  of  associated  symptoms 
in,  451 
astringents  in,  454 
bismuth  in,  454 
cardiac  stimulants  in,  456 
chalk  mixture  in,  454 
enemata  of  opium  and  tan- 
nic acid  in,  453,  455 
hypnotics  in,  454 
nutrient  enemata  in,  454 
opium  and  morphine  in, 455 
rest  in,  454 

surgical  measures  for  per- 
foration in,  455,  456 
tonics  in,  456 
Typhus  abdominalis    iSee  Typhoid  fever, 
exanthematicus.    See  Typhus  fever, 
fever,  457,  458 

complication  of,   laryngitis,  458 
pleurisy,  458 
pneumonia,  458 
symptoms  of,  457,  458 
treatment  of,  cardiac  stimulants 
in,  457 
cold   sponging,    wet    pack, 

and  baths  in,  457 
hygienic  measures  in,  467 
liquid  diet  in,  458 
opium  in,  458 
stimulants  in,  457 
tonics  in,  458 


ULCERATION  of  cornea,  mouth,  and 
fauces  in  smallpox,  429 
of  foot  in  diabetes  mellitus,  587 


Ulcer,  gastric.     See  Gastric  ulcer. 
Uraemia  in  ciri'hosis  of  the  kidney,  365 
in  diabetes,  588 
in  hydronephrosis,  346 
in  nephritis,  acute,  355 
chronic,  361,  362 
scarlatinal,  357 
in  pernicious  malaria,  482 
in  relapsing  fever,  460 
Uric  acid  gravel,  345,  348,  364 

in  gout,  546 
Urine,  altered  composition   of,  m  acute 
yellow  atrophv  of  liver, 
818 
in  albuminuria,  335-339 
in  chyluria,  334 
in  cirrhosis  of  the  kidney, 
365 
of  the  liver,  308,  309 
in  diabetes  insipidus,  577 

mellitus,  579,  580 
in  gout,  548 
in  hsematuria,  330-333 
in  hfemoglobinuria,  333 
in  lithuria,  322-325 
in  nephritis,  acute,  349 
chronic,  359 
scarlatinal,  356 
in  oxaluria,  328-330 
in  phosphaturia,  326-328 
in  pyelitis,  343-345 
in  renal  calculus,  339,  340 
diminished  flow  of,   in  cirrhosis  of 
the  kidney,  368 
in  hydronephrosis,  346 
in  nephritis,  acute,  348,  350 

chronic,  359,  362 
in  valvular  lesions,  chronic, 
25 
increased  flow  of,  in  cirrhosis  of  the 
kidney,  365 
in  diabetes  insipidus,  577 
mellitus,  579 
retention  of,  cause  of  pyelitis,  343 

in  gastric  cancer,  191 
suppression  of,  in  nephritis,  acute, 
350 
in  pernicious  malaria,  482 
in  relapsing  fever,  459 


VACCINATION  for  smallpox,  425 
V      Vaccines,  423,  424 
Valvular  lesions,  chronic,  22,  28 

aortic  regurgitation  in,  26 
symptom   of,    albuminuria, 
25 
anaemia,  22 
cough,  24 
dropsy,  25,  26 
dyspncea,  24,  27 
haemoptysis,  24 


INDEX. 


631 


Valvular  lesions,  ciironic,   symptom  of, 
headache,  28 
jaundice,  25 
pain,  27 
palpitation,  22 
rapidity  of  pulse,  22 
treatment  of,  amyl  nitrite 
in,  27 
bitter  tonics  in,  23 
caffeine  citrate  in,  23 
cardiac  tonics  in,  23,  24 
diet  in,  22 
digitalis  in,  23,  25 
ervthrol      tetranitrate 

"in,  28 
iron  in,  23 

liquor  trinitrini  in,  28 
mercury  in,  24 
nitrites  in,  23,  28 
nitroglycerin  in,  27 
quinine  in,  23 
stimulants  in,  22,  27 
strophanthus  in,  23,  27 
strychnine  in,  23 
vasodilators  in,  27 
venesection  in,  24 
Varicella.     See  Chicken-pox, 
Variola.     See  Smallpox. 
Vomiting,  153-156 
causes  of,  153-156 
central,  154,  155 

ti-eatment  of,  diaphoretics  in,  155 
iced  drinks  in,  155 
purgatives  in,  155 
quinine  in,  155 
with   acute    yellow  atrophy   of 

liver,  155 
with  Addison's  disease,  155 
with  ague,  155 
with  cerebral  abscess,  155 

injuries,  155 
with  malaria,  155 
with  meningitis,  154 
with  urfemia,  155 
gastric,  154 

treatment  of,  alkalies  in,  154 
carbolic  acid  in,  154 
gastric  sedatives  in,  154 
hydrocyanic  acid  in,  154 
ice  in,  154 

nutrient  enemata  in,  154 
potassium  permanganate  in, 

154 
sulphurous  acid  in,  154 
with  dilatation,  154 
with  dyspepsia,  154 
with  gastritis,  154 
with  ulceration,  154 
of  pregnancy,  155 

treatment  of,  acetanilide  in,  156 
bismuth    preparations    in, 
156 


Vomiting  uf   pregnancy,    treatment   of, 
cerium  oxalate  in,  156 
cocaine  in,  15G 
diluted    hydrocyanic    acid 

in,  156 
ipecacuanha  in,  156 
laxatives  in,  155 
morphine  in,  156 
phenazone  in,  156 
potassium  bromide  in,  156 
reflex,  155 

with  colic,  biliary,  intestinal  or 

renal  disorders,  155 
with  hepatic  abscess,  155 
^vith  pelvic  peritonitis,  155 
with  perforation  of  stomach,  155 
with  ulcerative  endocarditis,  155 
with  whooping-cough,  155 
with  Addison's  disease,  57 
with  Asiatic  cholera,  485 
with  cancer  of  the  liver,  312,  313 
with  cirrhosis  of  the  kidney,  365,  367 

of  the  liver,  303 
with  congestion  of  the  liver,  298 
with  diphtheria,  470 
with  dysentery,  244,  245 
with  gallstones,  281 
with  gastric  cancer,  192,  197 
neuroses,  198,  202 
ulcer,  184,  188 
with  gastritis,  acute,  166 
with  intestinal  colic,  206,  207 

obstruction,  252 
with  jaundice,  290 
with  malarial  fevers,  479,  482 
with  measles,  435 
with  meningitis,  417 
with  metastatic  gout,  557 
with  nephritis,  acute,  349,  354 
chronic,  362 
scarlatinal,  357 
with  peritonitis,  acute,  262,  264 
with  renal  calculus,  341,  342 
with  rickets,  570 
with  scarlet  fever,  431 
with  smallpox,  426 
with  stricture  of  the  oesophagus,  146 
with  syphilitic  disease  of  the  liver, 

314 
with  trichinosis,  279 
with  tuberculosis,  513,  514,  523 
with  uraemia,  154 
with  whooping-cough,  438 
with  worms,  271 


WEIR    MITCHELL    treatment     for 
gastric  neuroses,  202 
for  hysteria,  374 
Wet  pack  in  cirrhosis  of  the  kidnev,  367, 
368,  370 
in  maniacal  chorea,  382 


632 


INDEX. 


Wet  pack  in  nephritis,  acute,  352 
chronic,  361 
in  phthisis,  518 
in  typhus  fever,  457 
Whooping-cough,  438-443 

complication    of,    bronchitis,    438- 
442 
pneumonia,  439,  440,  443 
pulmonary  collapse,  439 
symptom  of,  catarrh,  438,  440 
dyspepsia.  443 
hemorrhages,  440,  443 
rise  of  temperature,  439 
spasmodic  cough,  440,  443 
vomiting,  438,  443 
treatment  of,  antispasmodics  in,  439 
belladonna  in,  439 
brandy  in,  44a 
bromoform  in,  441 
carbolic  acid  in,  440,  441 
chloral  in,  439 
cod-liver  oil  in,  442 
diet  in,  441 
heroin  in,  441 
hygienic  measures  in,  442 
inhalations  of  volatile  oils  and 
peroxide  of  hydrogen  in,  442 
opium  in,  442 
pepsin  in,  443 
perchloride  of  iron  in,  442 
pertussine  in,  441,  442 
potassium  bromide  in,  439 

chlorate  in,  442 
saline  solutions  in,  439 
sedatives  in,  442 
sodium  bicarbonate  in,  440 
sprays  of  oil  of  turpentine  and 

of  oil  of  eucalyptus  in,  442 
sulphur  fumes  in,  441 
tonics  in,  442 
with  emphysema,  98 
with  purpui-a,  574 
with  reflex  vomiting,  155 
with  rickets,  570 
Worms  in  the  intestine,  269-277 
varieties  of,  269 
round,  271,  272 

symptom  of,  diarrhoea,  271 
grinding  of  the  teeth,  272 
irritability,  272 
malnutrition,  272 
nasal  irritation,  272 
night  terrors,  272 
perverted  appetite,  272 
restlessness,  272 
vomiting,  271 
treatment  of,  castor  oil  in,  272 
kamala  in,  272 
kousso  in,  272 
mucuna  in,  272 
santonin  in,  272 
^  spigelia  in,  272 


Worms,   round,  ti-eatment  of,  tui-pentine 
in,  272 
tape,  273-277 

symptom  of,  choreic  movements, 

273 
colic,  273 
constipation,  273 
cramp,  273 
diarrhoea,  273 
distention,  273 
disturbance     of    nutrition, 

273 
hunger,  273 
irritation  of  anus  or  nose, 

373 
palpitation,  273 
treatment   of,    anaesthetics   in, 

277 
bromides  in,  275 
castor  oil  in,  275-277 
chlorides  in,  274 
diet  in,  274 
kamala  in,  277 
kousso  in,  276 
laxatives  in.  276 
mineral  acids  in,  274 

waters  in,  274 
oil  of  male  fei'n  in,  275 

of  turpentine  in,  276 
pepsin  in,  274 
pomegranate  root  in,  276 
pumpkin  seeds  in,  277 
purgatives  in,  273,  274 
salines  in,  274,  275 
vegetable  tonics  in,  274 
thread,  269-271 

symptom  of,  irritation,  271 
night  terrors,  271 
pallor,  271 
restlessness,  271 
sleeplessness.  271 
treatment  of,  aloes  in,  270 
calomel  in,  270 
carbolic  acid  in,  270,  271 
cinchona    preparations   in, 

270 
cocaine    hydrochloride  in, 

271 
kamala  in,  270 
purgatives  in,  270,  271 
quassia  in,  271 
rectal  injections  in,  271 
rhubarb  in,  271 
santonin  in,  270 
sedatives  in,  270 
tannin  solutions  in,  270,  271 
tonics  in,  271 
zinc  ointment  in,  271 


YELLOW  atrophy  of  the   liver.     See 
Acute  yellow  atrophy  of  the  liver. 


-■^•»::.' 


